ECON2004: Macroeconomic Theory and Policy:
The Open Economy and Crises
Lecturer: Wendy Carlin, Drayton House, Room 216
Outline for Part 2, Spring 2017
This term’s part of ECON2004 is concerned with the open economy and with open
economy aspects of the global financial crisis and the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis.
You will frequently need to make use of the closed economy analysis covered in the
autumn term. Please refer to the ECON2004 Moodle website for copies of the course
information and for on-line material.
Contact in UCL Library: Kieron Jones kieron.jones@ucl.ac.uk
Lectures: Thursday 11-1. All lectures are in the Chemistry Auditorium. Lecturecast
has been requested and recordings will be uploaded to Moodle.
Practical Lectures: Wednesdays 9-10 (see below and Moodle for details). Practicals
are in the Chemistry Auditorium.
Tutorial Classes: See Course Timetable available via Moodle for details.
Submission will be due by 23.55 on the Friday night in the week before the
class takes place.

Textbooks
The main text to be used this term: Wendy Carlin and David Soskice (2015),
Macroeconomics: Institutions, Instability and the Financial System. Oxford: OUP.

The text used in Econ1001, the e-book, The Economy (www.core-econ.org) is useful
background – read Units 12-15 and 17 for revision.
Olivier Blanchard, Alessia Amighini And Francesco Giavazzi
(2010) Macroeconomics: A European Perspective Macroeconomics is also useful..
In addition, you may find some of the chapters in the following helpful (use the index
as different editions are available):
Manfred Gaertner, European Macroeconomics (2009)
Paul de Grauwe, The Economics of Monetary Union Any recent edition.
Details of Core and Optional Readings are on the Moodle page

ECON2004 Term 2

1

Course Outline
Week
20

21

22 T

23 T

24 T P

25 RW
26

27 T P

28

29 T P

30 T

Lecture topic

Introduction
 Globalization in trade and capital markets
 Macro policy making in the open economy
 Open economy elements of crises
Model-building: financial markets, exchange rates and the UIP condition
Supply-side, demand-side and real exchange rates
Model-building:
The medium-run model in the open economy (AD-ERU model)
Inflation-targeting in the open economy
Model-building:
Extending the inflation-targeting model to include the foreign exchange market (3-equation model)
Inflation-targeting, exchange rate overshooting & volatility
Model-building:
Using the 3-equation model
The real exchange rate, external balance and the demand side
Model-building:
Competitiveness, multipliers, Marshall-Lerner condition, terms of trade
The real exchange rate, inflation and the supply side (the AD-BT-ERU model)
Model-building:
AD-BT-ERU model and policy analysis
All about oil: macro analysis of oil shocks and natural resource windfalls
Model-building:
Oil shocks in the AD-BT-ERU model; Applying the PIH to the open economy
External imbalances
Model-building:
2-bloc model with inflation targeting central banks
Economics of a Common Currency Area
– the Eurozone’s first decade and the sovereign debt crisis
Model-building:
Fixed exchange rates, stabilization, governance
Final lecture - the financial crisis, the great recession, secular stagnation.

ECON2004 Term 2

2

