About NTU - World's Top Young University

Young and research-intensive, Nanyang Technological University (NTU Singapore) is ranked 11th globally (QS World? University Ranking 2018). It is also the world’s top young university.?

The university has colleges of Engineering, Business, Science, Humanities, Arts, & Social Sciences, and an Interdisciplinary Graduate School. It also has a medical school, Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, set up jointly with Imperial College London.

NTU is also home to world-class autonomous ent?ities such as the National Institute of Education, S Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Earth Observatory of Singapore, and Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering. 

NTU provides a high-quality global education to about 33,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students. The student body includes top scholars and international olympiad medallists from the region and beyond.

Hailing from 80 countries, the university's 4,300-strong faculty and research staff bring dynamic international perspectives and years of solid industry experience.


A university for the world

NTU’s global reputation attracts faculty, students and partnerships from Asia, North America, Europe and beyond.
 

Working with local and global organisations, NTU actively explores cross-disciplinary solutions for the future. Among its academic partners are the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford University, Cornell University and Carnegie Mellon University in the US; Cambridge University and Technische Universitat Munchen in Europe; and Peking University and Waseda University in Asia. NTU works with many global industry and research leaders, and has developed joint laboratories with BMW, Rolls-Royce, Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Robert Bosch and Thales.

In 2009, NTU led the formation of the Global Alliance of Technological Universities, comprising seven top universities tackling societal issues through leading-edge science and technology. The alliance harnesses the strengths of its members – the California Institute of Technology, Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule Zurich, Georgia Institute of Technology, Imperial College London, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, NTU and Shanghai Jiao Tong University. NTU also contributes to the global academic enterprise as a member of the ASEAN University Network, Association of Commonwealth Universities, Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning and World Educational Research Association.
A rich heritage: national monuments on campus

Gazetted as a national monument in 1998 and now housing the Chinese Heritage Centre, the beautifully restored former Nanyang University Administration Building, with a distinct oriental character, overlooks the historical Yunnan Garden. The Nanyang University Memorial and original Nanyang University Arch were also declared national monuments of Singapore in 1998. The NTU Art & Heritage Museum is an approved public museum under the National Heritage Board’s Approved Museum S?cheme; benefactors who donate artworks and artefacts to NTU enjoy double tax deductions. 