The University of Hong Kong
Vision
The University of Hong Kong, Asia’s Global University, delivers impact through internationalisation, innovation and interdisciplinarity.  It attracts and nurtures global scholars through excellence in research, teaching and learning, and knowledge exchange.  It makes a positive social contribution through global presence, regional significance and engagement with the rest of China.
Mission
The University of Hong Kong will endeavour:
To advance constantly the bounds of scholarship, building upon its proud traditions and strengths
To provide a comprehensive education, benchmarked against the highest international standards, designed to develop fully the intellectual and personal strengths of its students, while extending lifelong learning opportunities for the community
To produce graduates of distinction committed to academic/professional excellence, critical intellectual inquiry and lifelong learning, who are communicative and innovative, ethically and culturally aware, and capable of tackling the unfamiliar with confidence
To develop a collegial, flexible, pluralistic and supportive intellectual environment that inspires and attracts, retains and nurtures scholars, students and staff of the highest calibre in a culture that fosters creativity, learning and freedom of thought, enquiry and expression
To provide a safe, healthy and sustainable workplace to support and advance teaching, learning and research at the University
To engage in innovative, high-impact and leading-edge research within and across disciplines
To be fully accountable for the effective management of public and private resources bestowed upon the institution and act in partnership with the community over the generation, dissemination and application of knowledge
To serve as a focal point of intellectual and academic endeavour in Hong Kong, China and Asia and act as a gateway and forum for scholarship with the rest of the world


History
the University of Hong Kong (or HKU, as it is familiarly known to students, staff and alumni) is the oldest tertiary education institution in Hong Kong.
On March 16, 1910, Sir Frederick Lugard, the then Governor of Hong Kong, laid the foundation stone for the University.
The University was first incorporated in Hong Kong as a self-governing body of scholars by the University Ordinance on March 30, 1911.
On March 11, 1912, the University was officially opened, and Arts, Engineering and Medicine would become its first Faculties. The Faculty of Medicine evolved from the Hong Kong College of Medicine, founded in 1887. Of the College's early alumni, the most renowned was Dr Sun Yat-sen, often regarded as the founder of modern China.
In December 1916, the University held its first congregation, with just 23 graduates.
It was ten years after the founding of HKU that women students were admitted for the first time.
In 1937, Queen Mary Hospital opened and has served as the University's teaching hospital since then. Before the outbreak of the Second World War, which would bring academic activities to a halt, there were four Faculties - Arts, Engineering, Medicine, and Science.
After 1945, the University underwent structural developments as post-war reconstruction efforts began in earnest.t