The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Economics 4120, Fall 2017

Applied Forecasting Methods
Instructor: Xiaohu(Frank) Wang
Office: Room 907, Esther Lee Building
E-mail: xiaohu.wang@cuhk.edu.hk
Office Hours: Wednesday 2:30pm-3:30pm or by appointment
Teaching Assistant: Ying, Zhang
Office: Room 1017, Esther Lee Building
E-mail: Zhying@link.cuhk.edu.hk
Office Hours: Tuesday 11:00am-12:00pm or by appointment
Tutorial Hours: TBA
Scheduled Class Time and Organizations: Class will meet once a week from 2:30pm to 5:15pm
on Tuesdays for lecture in room 307, Esther Lee Building. Students are encouraged to ask questions and provide suggestions throughout the course.
Course Description and Objectives: This course is designed as a sequel to Introduction to
Econometrics and focuses on forecasting. Forecasting is important, as forecasts are constantly
made in business, economics, government, finance, and many other fields and much depends on
them. This course will introduce you to econometric time-series models and methods that can
be used to generate forecasts. A wide range of topics are going to be covered, including basic
concepts of forecasting, forecasting trends and seasonality, ARIMA processes, combination of
forecasts, evaluation of forecasts, and volatility forecasting. Upon successful completion of this
course, the students are expect to master basic properties of modern forecasting models, and be
able to skillfully select appropriate forecasting models to fit real data sets and generate their own
forecasts.
Software: EVIEWS will be used for computer-based calculations. A student version of EVIEWS
is available at www.eviews.com. However, the freedom is granted for you to chose any statistical
software which you feel comfortable to use for assignments.
Course Web Page: Access through CUSIS.
Course Texts:
The required textbook is

1

Diebold, Francis X. (2008): "Elements of Forecasting," Fourth Edition, South Western College Publishing Co..
Good general econometrics textbooks are
Stock, James and Mark Watson (2003): "Introduction to Econometrics," Addison Wesley.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M.(2003): "Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach," Fifth
Edition, South Western College Publishing Co..
Advanced time series textbooks are
Hamilton, James (1994): "Time Series Analysis,", Princeton Univ. Press.
Fuller, Wayne A. (1996): "Introduction to Statistical Time Series," Second Edition, WileyInterscience.
Tsay, Ruey S. (2005): "Analysis of Financial Time Series," Second Edition, Wiley-Interscience.
Granger, C.W., John and Newbold, Paul (1986): "Forecasting Economic Time Series," Second Edition, New Milford, Connecticut, U.S.A..
Course Requirements:
Problem Sets [20%]: There will be three to four problem sets, assigned during the semester.
For each, students will have one week to complete. The problem sets are designed to give
you the opportunity to review and enhance the material learned in class.
Midterm Exam [20%]: It is scheduled at class time on Tuesday, Oct. 17.
Final Exam [60%]: The final exam will be conducted centrally by the school Registration
and Examination Section. All students are expected to take final examination at the same
time. If you are sick or have other compelling reasons preventing you from taking the
test, a certified medical note or proper documents from a dean or other authorities must be
supplied. Then a make-up exam might be scheduled. Exchange students are reminded that
early departure is not a valid reason for not taking the final exam.
Honesty in Academic Work: Please visit the following web-site for details of university policy
on Honesty in Academic Work: http://www.cuhk.edu.hk/policy/academichonesty/.
Course Outline:
The sessions outlined below include topics which are going to be covered in this course. These
are only approximate and more time will be spent on some topics than others.

2

1. Introduction to Forecasting
2. Review of Probability, Statistics and Regression for Forecasting
3. Six Considerations Basic to Successful Forecasting
The Decision Environment and Loss Function
The Forecast Object, Statement and Horizon
The Information Set
Methods and Complexity, the Parsimony Principle, and the Shrinkage Principle
4. Statistical Graphics for Forecasting
The Power of Statistical Graphics
Simple Graphical Techniques
Elements of Graphical Style
Application: Graphing Four Components of Real GDP
5. Modeling and Forecasting Trend
Modeling Trend
Estimating Trend Models
Forecasting Trend
Selecting Forecasting Models Using the Akaike and Schwarz Criteria
Applications: Forecasting Retail Sales
6. Modeling and Forecasting Seasonality
The Nature and Sources of Seasonality
Modeling Seasonality
Forecasting Seasonal Series
Applications: Forecasting Housing Starts
7. Characterizing Cycles
Covariance Stationary Time Series
White Noise
The Lag Operator
Wold’s Theorem, the General Linear Process, and Rational Distributed Lags
3

Estimation and Inference for the Mean, Autocorrelation, and Partial Autocorrelation
Functions
Application: Characterizing Canadian Employment Dynamics
8. Modeling Cycles: MA, AR, and ARMA Models
Moving Average (MA) Models
Autoregressive (AR) Models
Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA) Models
Applications: Specifying and Estimating Models for Employment Forecasting
9. Forecasting Cycles
Optimal Forecasts
Forecasting Moving Average Processes
Making the Forecasts Operational
The Chain Rule of Forecasting
Application: Forecasting Employment
10. A Forecasting Model with Trend, Seasonal, and Cyclical Components
Assembling What We’ve Learned
Application: Forecasting Liquor Sales
Recursive Estimation Procedures for Diagnosing and Selecting Forecasting Models
11. Forecasting with Regression Models
Conditional Forecasting Models and Scenario Analysis
Accounting for Parameter Uncertainty in Confidence Intervals for Conditional Forecasts
Unconditional Forecasting Models
Distributed Lags, Polynomial Distributed Lags, and Rational Distributed Lags
Regressions with Lagged Dependent Variables, Regressions with ARMA Disturbances,
and Transfer Function Models
Vector Autoregressions
Predictive Causality
impulse-Response Functions and Variance Decompositions
Application: Housing Starts and Completions
4

12. Evaluating and Combining Forecasts
Evaluating a Single Forecast
Evaluating Two or More Forecasts: Comparing Forecast Accuracy
Forecasting Encompassing and Forecast Combination
Application: OverSea Shipping Volume on the Atlantic East Trade Lane
13. Stochastic Trends
Stochastic Trends and Forecasting
Unit Roots: Estimation and Testing
Application: Modeling and Forecasting the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate
Smoothing
14. Volatility Measurement, Modeling, and Forecasting
The Basic ARCH Process
The GARCH Process
Estimating, Forecasting, and Diagnosing GARCH Models
Application: Stock Market Volatility

5

