Undergraduate Econometrics
Michaelmas 2017

Vanessa Berenguer-Rico
(vanessa.berenguer-rico@economics.ox.ac.uk)

Description

The course is divided into two parts: (I) Microeconometrics and (II) Macroeconometrics.
Part I introduces some of the main tools used in microeconometric analyses. This part consists
of three main topics. The …rst one starts by motivating the statistical tools (data, concepts, methods, etc...) used in microeconometrics from a general perspective. Then, the linear regression model
under classical assumptions is reviewed. Methods developed to deal with situations in which classical
assumptions are not satis…ed are also considered. The second topic focuses on nonlinear models. Nonlinear estimation methods, such as non-linear least squares and maximum likelihood, are thoroughly
examined. The third topic applies these non-linear estimation methods to binary response and count
data models.

Part II motivates the main theoretical and empirical features that appear when dealing with macroeconomic data. This part consists of three main topics. The …rst one discusses why the analysis of
macroeconomic time series di¤ers from the analysis of micro data. To that end, dependent and/or
heterogeneously distributed observations are introduced. The second topic focuses on the analysis of
univariate time series. In particular, stationary and non-stationary processes are studied. Special emphasis is given to autoregressive models. The third topic is devoted to the analysis of multivariate time
series. Single equation models are put forward. Speci…cally, autoregressive distributed lag models,
co-integrating relations and are discussed.

To deepen the understanding of the theoretical contents of the course as well as to familiarise you
with the analysis of real data, three computer lectures will be given by Felix Pretis (http://www.felixpretis.org/).

1

Outline

Part I. Microeconometrics
Topic 1. Preliminaries & the Linear Model
Regressions; Conditional Expectations. Linear model under Classical Assumptions. Relaxing
Classical Assumptions
Topic 2. Nonlinear Models
Non-linear Models in variables; Non-linear Models in parameters; M-estimators: Non-linear Least
Squares and Maximum Likelihood
Topic 3. Limited Dependent Variables
Probit and Logit; Count Data

Part II. Macroeconometrics
Topic 1. Macroeconomic Time Series
Dependent and/or Heterogeneously distributed Observations
Topic 2. Univariate Time Series
Stationary and Non-stationary Time Series Analysis
Topic 3. Multivariate Time Series
Single equation models: ADL, Co-integration, Error Correction models

2

Bibliography

Course References:
Brockwell and Davis: Introduction to Time Series and Forecasting. 2nd edition. Springer
Cameron and Trivedi: Microeconometrics. 8th printing. Cambridge
Greene: Econometric Analysis. 7th edition. Pearson
Hamilton: Time Series Analysis. 1st edition. Princeton
Hayashi: Econometrics. 1st edition. Princeton
Hendry: Introductory Macro-econometrics: A New Approach. 1st edition. Timberlake
Hendry and Nielsen: Econometric Modelling: A Likelihood Approach. Princeton
Mittelhammer: Mathematical Statistics for Economics and Business. 7th edition. Springer
Stock and Watson: Introduction to Econometrics. 3rd edition. Pearson
Wooldridge: Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. 2nd edition. MIT
Wooldridge: Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. 5th edition. Cengage

Complementary Readings:

Koenker and Hallock (2001): Quantile Regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 143-156.
(...)

Note

The content of the course is based on all the references listed above and lecture notes from the
professors who taught me this material at Universitat de Barcelona and Universidad Carlos III de
Madrid. I hope you enjoyed this course as much as I enjoyed theirs.

3

