DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA

J.L. Powell
Fall 2008
ECONOMICS 141
Econometric Analysis

Description: This course will introduce the statistical analysis of linear models, as applied to economic data.
Though much of the course will be devoted to derivation of econometric theory, applications of this theory to
particular problems in the analysis of economic data will also be presented.
Prerequisites: Statistics 20 and Math 53-54 or the equivalent. The first few lectures will review the pertinent
material from statistics; students must be comfortable with these basic concepts of probability theory and
statistical inference, and, more generally, with mathematical derivations and arguments. Matrix algebra and
multivariate calculus will be used later in the course.
Course Requirements: The grade in this course will be based on two midterm exams (worth 40% of the
grade), a final exam (35%), and performance on (approximately) biweekly problem sets (25%). The midterm
exams will be held in class, on October 2 and November 13. There will be no makeup exams; scheduling
conflicts should be discussed with the instructor or GSI at least a week prior to the exam. Regular attendance at
the discussion sections is important; in addition to reviewing the answers to the problem sets, the GSI will
discuss the computer software needed for some of the problem sets.
Required Text:

R.S. Pindyck and D.L. Rubinfeld, Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts,
Fourth Edition (McGraw-Hill, 1997).

Recommended Texts: Goldberger, A.S., A Course in Econometrics (Harvard, 1991).
J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson, Introduction to Econometrics (Addison-Wesley, 2003).
Course Website:

http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/powell/e141_f08/e141.html
COURSE OUTLINE
(two to three weeks per topic)

1.
Review of Probability and Statistical Inference (P&R, Ch. 2): Random variables, expectation and
variance rules, point and interval estimation, univariate hypothesis tests.
2.
Simple Linear Regression (P&R, Ch 1,3): Least squares estimation, statistical properties of the
estimates, goodness of fit.
3.
Multiple Regression (P&R, Ch. 4,5): Elements of matrix algebra, estimation of regression coefficients,
tests of linear restrictions, dummy variables, prediction.
4.
Departures from Basic Assumptions I (P&R, Ch. 6): Nonnormality, heteroskedasticity, serial
correlation, lagged dependent variables.
5.
Departures from Basic Assumptions II (P&R, Ch. 7): Nonlinearity, omitted variables, measurement
error, simultaneous equations, limited dependent variables.
6.
Advanced Topics (P&R, Ch. 8-12): Forecasting, time series models, panel data, nonlinear models,
simultaneous equations.

