Version: 9 July 2017 
 

ECON 3102

Macroeconomics 3
Mode of Delivery

On campus, in person

Prerequisites

As listed in Programs and Courses

Incompatible Courses

Incompatible with ECON8026

Co-taught Courses

N/A

Course Convener and
Lecturer/Tutor:

Dr. Timo Henckel

Phone:

02 6125 5540

Email:

timo.henckel@anu.edu.au

Lecture times:

Tue 10-11am & Fri 2-4pm

Tutorial times:

TBA

Office hours for student
consultation:

TBA, Crisp/Copland 2088

Research Interests

Macroeconomics, Monetary economics, International
finance, Behavioural economics

RSE Student Office
Contact

Nicole Millar

Phone:

02 6125 0384

Email:

enquiries.rse@anu.edu.au

RSE Students Webpage

www.rse.anu.edu.au/students

SEMESTER 2, 2017

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

 
 
 

P a g e  | 2 

COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Description
This course extends and reinforces the material developed in Macroeconomics 2 by
analysing a number of policy issues in macroeconomics. Its objective is to show how
practical problems can be structured and analysed using macroeconomic models and
appropriate data. Most of the applications will be drawn from contemporary and historical
Australian and international experience. Topics to be discussed include measurement and
interpretation of macroeconomic aggregates; impact of the world economy on short-run
fluctuations in Australia; determinants of economic growth and foreign debt; assessment of
the impact of fiscal policy; inflation targets and monetary policy; and the persistence of
unemployment.
Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of this course, students should be able to:
1. be able to use macroeconomic models to examine and understand recent major
economic events in the Australian economy;
2. understand how to use different macroeconomic models to evaluate macroeconomic
activity;
3. be familiar with the main computational models used in Australia to forecast
economic activity, and how they are used to evaluate policy proposals;
4. know how to report macroeconomic policy analysis in a coherent way with clear
explanations of the economic intuition.
Assessment Summary
Assessment Task Description

Value

2 Assignments

ASAP
TBA,
15% for first
probably
assignment,
15% for second Week 4 and
assignment, both Week 10
compulsory &
non-redeemable

Take-home
tasks to be
handed in
writing, involving
problem-solving
questions and
modelling
exercises
Mid-semester exam 120 minutes with
15 minutes
reading time
Final exam

25%,
compulsory &
redeemable

Due Date

Week 7

Date for Return of
Assessment

ASAP

150 minutes with 45%,
Final
ASAP
30 minutes
compulsory &
examination
reading time
non-redeemable period

Research-Led Teaching
While the course’s mission is to teach macroeconomic principles, a strong emphasis will be
placed on critical thinking. The lecturer is an active researcher, with expertise in
macroeconomics, monetary economics, international finance and behavioural economics.
Whenever possible, he draws attention to new ideas and evidence in macroeconomics.

 
 
 
Feedback

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

P a g e  | 3 

Staff Feedback
Students will be given feedback in the following ways:
 Oral feedback in lectures and tutorials and during consultations
 Written comments, where relevant, will be included in the assignments returned to
students.
 Online feedback through the Wattle course site, especially in the Discussion Forum
Student Feedback
ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks
feedback from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is
through Student Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in
these surveys is anonymous and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee
and Academic Board with opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for
improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on
ANU courses, go to
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/
I take these surveys seriously. Please take the time at the end of the course to complete the
SELS surveys for this course. Thank you in advance for your cooperation and support.
Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure that
staff and students are aware of the University’s academic standards, and implement them.
You can find the University’s education policies and an explanatory glossary at:
http://policies.anu.edu.au/
Students are expected to have read the Academic Misconduct Rule before the
commencement of their course.
Other key policies include:
 Student Assessment (Coursework)
 Student Surveys and Evaluations
Required Resources
Students should obtain a copy of the following textbook which forms the basis for much of
this course:


Carlin, Wendy, and David Soskice, Macroeconomics: Institutions, Instability, and the
Financial System, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.

You should be able to obtain a copy through the ANU Coop bookshop. Alternatively, order a
copy through www.amazon.com or www.bookdepository.com. Do not confuse this book with
the authors’ 2005 textbook Macroeconomics: Imperfections, Institutions, and Policies, also
from Oxford University Press.

 
ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 
P a g e  | 4 
 
 
Recommended Resources
Other possible texts for the course, of varying degree of difficulty and relevance, include:










Carlin, Wendy, and David Soskice, Macroeconomics: Imperfections, Institutions, and
Policy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Williamson, Stephen D., Macroeconomics 5th edition, New York: Pearson, 2014.
Gottfries, Nils, Macroeconomics, London: Palgrave Macmillan. 2015.
Leamer, Edward E., Macroeconomic Patterns and Stories: A Guide for MBAs, Berlin:
Springer, 2009.
Montiel, Peter J., International Macroeconomics, Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
Chugh, Sanjay K., Modern Macroeconomics, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2015.
Heijdra, Ben J., Foundations of Modern Macroeconomics 2nd edition, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009.
Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Benoît Cœuré, Pierre Jacquet, and Jean Pisani-Ferry,
Economic Policy: Theory and Practice, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Godley, Wynne, and Marc Lavoie, Monetary Economics: An Integrated Approach to
Credit, Money, Income, Production and Wealth, London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.

If you cannot afford, or do not wish to own, a personal copy of the textbooks, I am trying to
ensure copies are available from the ANU Libraryʼs 2-hour reserve listing.
You should try to stay abreast of current events and regularly read the business and
economics sections of leading newspapers and magazines (The Economist, Financial
Times, Australian Financial Review, etc.)

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

 
 
 

P a g e  | 5 

COURSE SYLLABUS

Week/
Summary of Activities
Session
1

TBA

2

Exogenous and Endogenous Growth (Ch 8)

3

Introduction and Review of Short-Run (Chs 1 & 2)

4

3-Equation Model and Policy (Ch 3)

5

Expectations (Ch 4)

6

Money, Banking and Finance I (Chs 5 & 6)

7

Money, Banking and Finance II (Chs 6 & 7)

8

Open Economy I (Chs 9 & 10)

9

Open Economy II (Chs 10 & 11)

10

Overlapping Generations (OLG) Models

11

Monetary and Fiscal Policy (Chs 13, 14 & 16)

12

Behavioural Macroeconomics
Examination period

Assessment

Assignment 1

Midsemester Exam

Assignment 2

Final Exam

 
Unless otherwise specified, chapter numbers refer to the Carlin & Soskice textbook. You will
be told in advance which sections in the textbook are relevant.
For some topics additional sources will be necessary. These will be made available to you
prior to the respective lecture(s).
This course outline is indicative only. Depending on how the course progresses, the
weighting of some topics may change and some topics may be dropped or added.

 
 
 

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

P a g e  | 6 

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
The ANU is using Turnitin to enhance student citation and referencing techniques, and to
assess assignment submissions as a component of the University's approach to managing
Academic Integrity. For additional information regarding Turnitin please visit the ANU Online
website.
Students may choose not to submit assessment items through Turnitin. In this instance you
will be required to submit, alongside the assessment item itself, copies of all references
included in the assessment item.
As a further academic integrity control, students may be selected for a 15 minute individual
oral examination of their written assessment submissions.
Any student identified, either during the current semester or in retrospect, as having used
ghost writing services will be investigated under the University’s Academic Misconduct Rule.
Assessment Tasks
Participation
There are no marks allocated for attendance but participation in lectures and tutorials is
encouraged. It is expected that students prepare for lectures and tutorials in advance.
2 Take-Home Assignments
See assessment summary above for details.
Examinations
There will be one mid‐term exam, testing the entire material covered in the first six weeks. It
will be held in week 7.
The final exam will test the entire material covered throughout the semester, with an
emphasis on the second half of the course. (Roughly one third of the exam will cover the first
half of the course, and two thirds of the exam will cover the second half of the course.) It will
be held during the university examination period.
The format of the mid-term and final exams has not yet been determined. Most likely, it will
consist of three parts. The first part contains multiple choice questions (MCQ). The second
part contains “short answer” questions (SAQ) that typically focus on a single concept. Good
answers to these questions range from a couple of sentences to approx. half a page, rarely
longer. The third part contains “long answer” questions (LAQ), with several sub-questions,
which test your technical skills as well as your general understanding, intuition and
knowledge of macroeconomics.
Answers on exams should be clear, neat, relevant and concise. Due to the volume of
grading, there will only be minimal written comments.
Extensions and penalties
Extensions and late submission of assessment pieces are covered by the Student
Assessment (Coursework) Policy and Procedure.
The Course Convener may grant extensions for assessment pieces that are not
examinations or take-home examinations. If you need an extension, you must request it in
writing on or before the due date. If you have documented and appropriate medical evidence

 
ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 
P a g e  | 7 
 
 
that demonstrates you were not able to request an extension on or before the due date, you
may be able to request it after the due date.
No submission of assessment tasks without an extension after the due date will be
permitted. If an assessment task is not submitted by the due date, a mark of 0 will be
awarded.
Returning assignments
The assignments will be returned during the tutorials and/or lectures as soon as they are
marked. An announcement will be made in Wattle.
Resubmission of assignments
Resubmission of assignments is not possible.
Referencing requirements
Students are expected to familiarize themselves with and apply standard referencing
procedures. Carefully read and understand the information contained in the relevant web
pages under http://www.anu.edu.au/students/learning-development/academic-integrity.
Please pay particular attention to the pages on:
 academic integrity (http://www.anu.edu.au/students/learning-development/academicintegrity/academic-integrity), and
 academic misconduct and plagiarism (http://www.anu.edu.au/students/programadministration/assessments-exams/academic-honesty-plagiarism).
Scaling
Your final mark for the course will be based on the raw marks allocated for each of your
assessment items. However, your final mark may not be the same number as produced by
that formula, as marks may be scaled. Any scaling applied will preserve the rank order of
raw marks (i.e. if your raw mark exceeds that of another student, then your scaled mark will
exceed the scaled mark of that student), and may be either up or down.
WARNING
There is a growing tendency for students to haggle over grades. This is totally unacceptable.
You are reminded that you need to earn your grades. This requires hard work, many hours
of studying, and focus. Top grades (high distinction) are rare; they are evidence of
outstanding academic achievement. In the past typically no more than 10% of students earn
HD’s. It is important that you are realistic about your expectations.

 
 
 

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

P a g e  | 8 

COMMUNICATION
All course material, including lecture slides, problem sets, articles, etc., will be made
available on the Wattle site for ECON3102. All students formally enrolled in this course
should have access to this site and should check it several times a week.
Typically, preliminary slides will be posted shortly before the lecture. Sometimes revised or
updated lecture slides will be posted after the lecture. Problem sets for the tutorials will
normally be made available each Thursday evening for the following week.
If you have questions about the course, either about the lectures or the tutorials, please
contact me.
I am there to help you. However, I am a busy person and I also have a private life. It is
unreasonable for you to expect me to be on call 24/7.
I have office hours. Take advantage of them. If you need to see me outside my office hour,
please arrange a time beforehand, preferably by email. Please do not show up at my office
outside office hours unannounced.
As a general rule, when communicating with your tutor and your lecturer, please be polite.
Starting an email with “Hey” is inappropriate; do not be surprised if you do not receive a
response to rude messages.

 
 
 

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

P a g e  | 9 

HOW TO LEARN
Lectures
To learn the material, it is necessary to attend lectures regularly and to read the assigned
texts/articles. Readings consist of textbook chapters, other book chapters, academic journal
articles and newspaper/magazine articles, most of which will be made available on Wattle.
You should go over the material in your own time before and after the lectures. Some
additional readings may be provided after the lectures.
For this course, given its pace and demanding nature, you must read the relevant
textbook sections prior to attending the lecture. You will be told prior to the lectures
which sections will be covered. I will assume that everyone has read the textbook sections
as I will not cover all relevant material in the lectures. I will use the lectures to focus on key
issues and particularly challenging concepts.
Although timetabling has reserved three contact hours per week for lectures, the two-hour
sessions on Fridays are the primary lecture times. The Tuesday lecture is an “overflow”
lecture that I will use as required. I expect to use approx. 6 or 7 of the Tuesday lectures. I will
let you know in advance if and when we meet on Tuesdays. Make sure you are always
available for the Tuesday and Friday lectures.
All lectures will be recorded and made available on the Echo360 section of the Wattle course
site. Echo360 is meant for people who really cannot make it to particular lectures, for people
who are unable to attend physically (i.e. for medical reasons), and for those wanting to
review the lecture material. For the able-bodied the Echo360 is not meant to be a substitute
for attending lectures.
Staying Abreast of Current Events
You should try to stay abreast of current events and regularly read the business and
economics sections of leading newspapers and magazines (The Economist, Financial
Times, Australian Financial Review, etc.)
Tutorials
A crucial component of the course is the ability to analyse a problem using macroeconomic
tools. Learning‐by‐doing is the best way to achieve this. To this end, you should always
attempt the problem sets before attending your tutorials. Simply copying answers provided in
the tutorial is an ineffective and dangerous technique for learning how to solve problems.
Additional questions at the end of each chapter in the text provide further practice.
Many questions will be difficult, some will be very difficult. This is deliberate to force you to
think hard about a problem. Arriving at the correct answer is of secondary import to begin
with—you learn from mistakes and from being pushed. Even if the solution appears elusive,
you should attempt every question. The brain is like a rubber band—it is only useful when
stretched.
You are strongly encouraged to actively participate in tutorials by volunteering answers,
asking questions and engaging with me and your class mates. I am there to assist in
learning the material, provided you have attended the lecture, kept up with the reading and
made a serious effort at answering the tutorial questions. I cannot make up for the lack of
student effort.

 
ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 
P a g e  | 10 
 
 
Additional Learning Aids and Online Resources
Make use of the internet where you can find a plethora of useful learning aids and online
resources. The Preface of the Carlin & Soskice textbook points you to additional study aides
which you should definitely take advantage of. They will help you understand and remember
the material.
Small Study Groups
You are strongly encouraged to study in small groups (2‐4 students). Study groups provide
you with a non‐threatening environment to ask questions and discuss mutual problems. If
you are stuck on a problem, probably someone else is too. Moreover, explaining a concept
to your peers is the best way to learn and calcifies the material in your memory. Finally,
study groups offer an effective commitment device to do the work. However, you should
make sure that the problem sets reflect your own work; members of a study group should
not write down identical answers.
Wattle Discussion Forum
Use the Wattle Discussion Forum! Feel free to post questions (and answers!) related to the
course material on the Discussion Forum. The usual internet etiquette applies. Be precise,
concise and specific.
A good question might be, “In Tutorial Problem Set 2, Question 4, we are asked to analyse
the effect of an oil price shock on GDP and inflation assuming rational expectations. Here is
my proposed answer: The AS curve jumps up, causing an increase in inflation and a
reduction in GDP but I’m unsure whether the AD curve also jumps to the new equilibrium, or
whether the AD curve moves to the new equilibrium gradually. Any ideas? And what is the
economic intuition?”
This question clearly shows that the student has thought about the problem and attempted to
answer it herself in the first instance.
Posing a question such as “I don’t understand what the AD curve is and all this curve shifting
is totally confusing. The exam is only 8 weeks away!!!!!!!!!!!!!! This is too hard!!!!!!” is not
useful.
Students are encouraged to post answers (precise, concise and specific) to their peers’
questions. If all goes well, there will be a lively discussion of the course material on the
Wattle Forum, with everyone benefiting.
I will monitor the forum discussions and will periodically contribute, mostly when I can tell
that the discussion is going in a completely wrong direction.
Repeat: Please be polite, relevant, precise, concise and specific.
Summary:
Internalize the following Confucian wisdom:
I hear and I forget.
I see and I remember.
I do and I understand.

 
 
 

ECON3102, 2nd Sem 2017 Course Outline 

P a g e  | 11 

FURTHER INFORMATION
Privacy Notice
The ANU has made a number of third party, online, databases available for students to use.
Use of each online database is conditional on student end users first agreeing to the
database licensor’s terms of service and/or privacy policy. Students should read these
carefully.
In some cases student end users will be required to register an account with the database
licensor and submit personal information, including their: first name; last name; ANU email
address; and other information.
In cases where student end users are asked to submit ‘content’ to a database, such as an
assignment or short answers, the database licensor may only use the student’s ‘content’ in
accordance with the terms of service – including any (copyright) licence the student grants to
the database licensor.
Any personal information or content a student submits may be stored by the licensor,
potentially offshore, and will be used to process the database service in accordance with the
licensors terms of service and/or privacy policy.
If any student chooses not to agree to the database licensor’s terms of service or privacy
policy, the student will not be able to access and use the database. In these circumstances
students should contact their lecturer to enquire about alternative arrangements that are
available.
Support for Students
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is
available online from http://students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/.
RSE has a Frequently Asked Questions page where you can find relevant policies and
information on a broad range of topics, the onus is on the student to familiarise themselves
with this page and the information available.
https://www.rse.anu.edu.au/students/students/frequently-askedquestions/
Building Access Hours
Both CBE and HW ARNDT buildings:
 TEACHING PERIOD: Mon-Fri 07.45 to 21.15 and SAT, SUN and Public Holidays is
not accessible by students.
 NON TEACHING PERIOD: Mon-Fri 08.00 to 18.00 and SAT, SUN and Public
Holidays is not accessible by students.

RSE has a Frequently Asked Questions page where you can find
relevant policies and information on a broad range of topics
https://www.rse.anu.edu.au/students/frequently-asked-questions/

