Macroeconomic Theory
ECON 330D1-002
Chinmay Sharma

September 10, 2017

1

Course Objectives

The objective of this course is to make you familiar with the modern day tools and methods
of macroeconomics. Macroeconomics is a vast eld, and it is not possible to summarize it
in its entirety in a single course. It is my hope, however, that by the end of this course, you
will be able to:
1. Understand and critically assess macroeconomic policies implemented by policy makers
and governments. Such analyses would involve weighing the costs and benets of
policies.
2.

For instance, this would entail going above and
beyond a layperson's understanding of economic issues. In economics, there is generally
no single right answer. One should generally refrain from making blanket statements.

Start thinking like a macroeconomist!

I have attempted to combine material from a number of sources, and I will strive to make
the material as intuitive as possible. We will be going over a variety of models that attempt
to simplify reality and distill economic problems to their crucial and quintessential aspects.
Models are not to be taken as literal representations of the world. They are an abstraction
because reality is just too complex to be encapsulated by a single model. For instance, how
will consumers react to an increase in the interest rate? To answer this question, we will
need to make assumptions about the economy generally, and consumers specically. One
way to think about models is to juxtapose them to maps. In order to learn about distances
between countries, we can use a map instead of navigating a ship across high seas. Of course,
the appropriateness of models relies on the plausibility of their assumptions. Questioning
the assumptions of models and indeed, realizing that they may fail in certain (if not most)
real world cases is also a key component to understanding models. We will be making use
of distinct models to go over a variety of relevant, and interesting topics. These include,
but are not limited to: the theory of output, consumption, investment, employment (and
unemploymet), economic growth, business cycles, the price level and central banking.
1

2

Lecturer Contact Information
•

Email: chinmay.sharma@mcgill.ca

•

Oce Hours:

•

Location of Oce Hours: Leacock 437

3

TBD

Textbooks and Material

I will be making use of the book by Stephen D. Williamson, titled Macroeconomics. This
book will form the core of the lectures. Lectures will be posted before each class, and students
will be expected to keep up with the lectures. The subject matter is cumulative in nature- id
est if you fail to keep up with lectures, you will nd that future lectures become increasingly
hard to comprehend. I will also be using journal articles to supplement some of the lectures
covered in class.

4

Class Schedule

2 Classes per week (Wednesdays and Fridays from 2:35 P.M to 3:55 P.M) at ENGTR 0100.

5
5.1

Grading Policy
Assignments

The grading for this course comprises of two components: 4 homework assignments and 2
nal exams. The 4 homework assignments are worth 7.5% each. As such, the homework
component will count for 30% of your overall grade. Two of the homework exercises can be
done in groups (these will be empirical in nature), and two of them will have to be done
individually. Moreover, the group assignments will have to be typed by separately by
each student. Late assignments will be penalized by 10 marks each day (out of 100), for a
maximum of 5 days, after which they will be awarded a mark of 0.
I will be using mycourses to post the homework assignments and other class related documents.
5.2

Final Exams

There will be two closed book, cumulative nal exams during the regular exam periods in
December and April. You will be expected to know and understand the material that we
will cover in classes. The exam in December will cover approximately half of the material,
whereas the one in April will be cumulative. As such, the April exam will contain a lot
more testable information. Without loss of generality, assume that the grade for the exam
2

in December is E1 whereas the one for April is E2 . The exam component of the course will
be computed as follows:
(
E2
if E2 − E1 ≥ 10
G=
0.6×max (E1 , E2 ) + 0.4 × min (E1 , E2 ) o/w

where the former if condition ensures that a student is able to raise an entire letter grade or
more on the nal, relative to the midterm. If a student meets this condition, then the exam
will count for 100% of the grade component. This scheme will always weigh the higher grade
more, and will reward signicantimprovement handsomely.
5.3

Missed Exam

In the eventuality that you miss the nal exam due to an illness or extenuating circumstances,
you will need to provide a Doctor's note for the former or a proof of the latter no later
than a week after the exam, in which case you will be allowed to write a supplemental
exam.

6
6.1

Policy Statements
Academic Integrity

McGill University values academic integrity. Therefore, all students must understand the
meaning and consequences of cheating, plagiarism and other academic oences under the
Code of Student Conduct and Disciplinary Procedures (see www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/
for more information)
L'université McGill attache une haute importance à l'honnêteté académique. Il incombe par
conséquent à tous les étudiants de comprendre ce que l'on entend par tricherie, plagiat et
autres infractions académiques, ainsi que les conséquences que peuvent avoir de telles actions,
selon le Code de conduite de l'étudiant et des procédures disciplinaires (pour de plus amples
renseignements, veuillez consulter le site www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/).
6.2

Language of Submission

In accord with McGill University's Charter of Students' Rights, students in this course have
the right to submit in English or in French any written work that is to be graded.
Conformément à la Charte des droits de l'étudiant de l'Université McGill, chaque étudiant a
le droit de soumettre en français ou en anglais tout travail écrit devant être noté (sauf dans
le cas des cours dont l'un des objets est la maîtrise d'une langue).

3

6.3

Additional Statements

Instructor-generated course materials (e.g., handouts, notes, summaries, exam questions,
etc.) are protected by law and may not be copied or distributed in any form or in any
medium without explicit permission of the instructor. Note that infringements of copyright
can be subject to follow up by the University under the Code of Student Conduct and
Disciplinary Procedures.
In the event of extraordinary circumstances beyond the University's control, the content
and/or evaluation scheme in this course is subject to change.

4

7

(Tentative) Course Plan

Topic

Content

Topic 1

• GDP and its Measurement

Topic 2

• Consumer and Firm Behavior: The Work-Leisure Decision and Prot

Topic 3

Maximization
• A Closed-Economy One-Period Macroeconomic Model

Topic 4

• A Two-Period Model: The Consumption Savings Decision and Credit

Topic 5
Topic 6
Topic 7

• The Solow Growth Model

Markets
• A Real Intertemporal Model with Investment
• A Monetary Intertemporal Model

Topic 8

• Money, Ination, and Banking

Topic 9

• Unemployment: Search and Eciency Wages

5

