The	Chinese	University	of	Hong	Kong	
ECON	2021A&B	Basic	Macroeconomics	
1st	term,	2017‐18	

	
Lecturer:	Woo,	Wai	Chiu,	wcwoo@cuhk.edu.hk,	Tel:	39438234,	ELB1003.		
Consultation:	Please	pay	a	visit	to	my	office	anytime,	or	send	me	an	e‐mail	for	appointment.		
	
Teaching	assistants	(TA):	Their	office	hours	will	be	announced	in	Blackboard	website	later		
 Fu,	Chi	Lok,	nicholasfucl@cuhk.edu.hk,	Tel:	39433536,	ELB	1007.	
 Zhang, Yiran,	zhangyiran@cuhk.edu.hk,	Tel:	39438202,	ELB	1017.		
	
Teaching	time	and	venues:		
 Class	A:	every	Wed	2:30PM	‐	3:15PM	in	ELB	LT3	and	Thu	08:30AM	‐	10:15AM	in	ELB	LT4	
 Class	B:	every	Mon	12:30PM	‐	1:15PM	in	ELB	LT4	and	Wed	3:30PM	‐	05:15PM	in	ELB	LT3	
 The	teaching	period	starts	from	4th	Sept	2017	and	ends	on	2nd	December	2017		
	
Course	 description:	 This	 course	 introduces	 the	 basic	 mathematical	 models	 that	 are	 used	 by	
economists	 to	 explain	 short‐	 to	 long‐run	 performance	 in	 the	 whole	 economy.	 We	 use	 math	 no	
more	than	simple	high‐school	algebra.	However,	students	wanting	to	avoid	mathematics	should	
take	 another	 course	 “ECON	 1010	 Perspectives	 in	 Economics”.	 Our	 core	 concern	 is	 to	 endow	
students	 with	 skills	 to	 handle	 IS/LM,	 AS/AD	 and	 growth	 models,	 and	 the	 factors	 underlining	
them.	We	are	interested	in	matters	related	to,	but	not	limited	to,	business	cycles,	unemployment,	
inflation,	fiscal	policy	and	monetary	policy,	and	economic	growth.		
	
Learning	 outcomes:	 Upon	 successful	 completion	 of	 the	 course,	 students	 should	 be	 able	 to	
understand	 some	 simple	 causal	 relationships	 between	 macroeconomic	 events	 and	 the	 reasons	
why	some	macroeconomic	policies	can	or	cannot	be	used	to	deal	with	some	economic	problems.	
	
Learning	activities:		
	
Lectures:		
 You	are	advised	to	bring	your	own	papers	and	take	notes	during	every	lecture.		
 Attending	 lectures	 is	 not	 compulsory.	 Therefore,	 your	 attendance	 implies	 that	 you	 implicitly	
agree	to	comply	with	a	minimal	rule	of	lecture	–	“keep	quiet”	such	that	students	can	listen	and	I	
can	present	smoothly.			
	
Textbooks:		
 The	adopted	textbook	is:	Blanchard,	Olivier.	Macroeconomics.	Pearson	Education.	The	assigned	
chapters	in	the	reading	list	below	will	be	followed	rather	closely.			
 You	do	not	need	to	do	the	end‐of‐chapters	questions	of	the	textbook.	Instead,	you	should	do	
the	sample	tests,	assignments	and	past	exam	questions	for	preparing	exams.		
	
Tutorials:		
 Tutorials	 will	 normally	 start	 from	 the	 third/fourth	 teaching	 week	 (we	 will	 make	
announcement	 to	 confirm	 this).	 TAs	 will	 go	 through	 either	 sample	 test	 questions	 or	
assignments	in	tutorials.		
 Attending	 tutorials	 is	 not	 compulsory.	 However,	it	is	my	policy	that	written	answers	will	never	
be	posted	on	the	website	or	given	to	students.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 know	 the	 answers,	 you	 should	
attend	the	tutorials	for	the	oral	explanations.		
	
e‐mails	and	appointments:		
 You	are	welcome	to	communicate	with	me	and	TAs	via	e‐mail.	But	please	use	e‐mails	only	for	
questions	 that	 can	 be	 answered	 via	 a	 short	 text.	 Long	 questions	 requiring	 long	 answers	 can	
only	be	handled	in	face‐to‐face	meetings.		
 For	 making	 an	 appointment	 (through	 e‐mail)	 with	 me	 or	 TAs	 for	 your	 questions,	 it	is	better	
that	you	inform	me	or	TAs	of	the	specific	questions	that	you	would	like	to	discuss	before	you	come.		
	
Course	website	in	Blackboard		
 Please	visit	https://blackboard.cuhk.edu.hk.	

 Check	 the	 “announcement”	 at	 least	 before	 each	 class.	 Copies	 of	 sample	 test,	 assignment	
questions,	and	grades	will	also	be	released	through	the	website.		
 If	you	find	mistakes	in	your	grade	record,	you	should	report	to	TA	promptly.	The	grade	record	
posted	there	will	be	used	for	calculating	your	final	grade.		
	
Grading:	
	
Assignments	(10%):		
 There	will	be	five	to	six	assignments.	The	questions	will	be	posted	on	the	blackboard	website	
after	the	first	few	weeks.	The	due	dates	will	also	be	posted	as	we	go	along.		
 You	are	required	to	read	and	sign	on	a	statement	about	academic	honesty	before	submission	
of	your	assignments.	(Please	browse	http://www.cuhk.edu.hk/policy/academichonesty.)		
	
Test	(40%):		
 The	test	will	be	held	in	class	of	the	final	week.	This	means		
Class	A	test	on	30th	November	2017;	Class	B	test	on	29th	November	2017.	
 There	will	be	no	makeup	test.	If	you	miss	the	test	for	your	class	due	to	documented	illness	or	
emergency	 and	 have	 received	 my	 approval	 not	 later	 than	 7	 days	 after	 the	 test,	 you	 will	 be	
required	to	do	some	other	things	to	compensate	(details	to	be	determined	later).	Approval	is	
not	always	granted	and	will	depend	on	your	document	and/or	reasons	submitted.	Otherwise,	
you	simply	receive	a	zero	mark	for	the	test.	I	will	only	accept	a	medical	note	either	issued	by	the	
University	Health	Service	or	issued	by	a	doctor	registered	in	the	Medical	Council	of	Hong	Kong.	
The	original	copy,	not	photocopy,	must	be	shown	to	me.		
	
Final	exam	(50%):		
 To	be	arranged	by	the	University	Examination	Section	during	the	exam	period	(6th	Dec	to	22nd	
Dec)	 and	 not	 controlled	 by	 me.	 (Don’t	 ask	 me	 about	 the	 date	 and	 venue.	 I	 will	 never	 know	
earlier	 than	 you.)	 You	 should	 follow	 the	 University	 regulations	 (including	 sick	 leave)	 about	
final	examination.	I	have	no	discretionary	power	to	change	it.		
 Exchange	 students	 are	 reminded	 that	 early	 departure	 is	 NOT	 a	 valid	 reason	 for	 not	 taking	 the	
final	and	no	makeup	exam	will	be	given	for	this	reason.				
	
Course	outline	and	readings:	
	
Topics	
Relevant	chapters	in	Blanchard	
	
5th	edition	
6th	edition	
7th	edition	
(I)	Core	topics:	
1.	Introduction	 	
Ch.	1,2	&	App.	1	
Ch.	1,2	&	App.	1	
Ch.	1,2	&	App.	1	
A.	Short‐run	models:		
2.	Goods	markets	
Ch.	3	
Ch.	3	
Ch.	3	
3.	Financial	markets	
N.A.	
N.A.
N.A.
4.	IS‐LM	analysis	
Ch.	5	
Ch.	5	
Ch.	5	
B.	Medium‐run	models:	
5.	Labour	market	
Ch.	6	
Ch.	6	
Ch.	7	
6.	Aggregate	demand	&	supply	 Ch.	7	
Ch.	7	
N.A.	
7.	Phillips	curve	
Ch.	8	
Ch.	8	
Ch.	8	
C.	Long‐run	models:	
8.	Basic	growth	models	
Ch.	10‐12	
Ch.	10‐12	
Ch.	10‐12	
(II)	Elective	topics:		
9.	Economic	crisis	
Ch.	9	
Ch.	9	
Ch.	9	
10.	Expectations	
Ch.	14‐Ch.	17	
Ch.	14‐Ch.	17	
Ch.	14‐Ch.	16	
11.	Open	economy	
Ch.	18‐Ch.	21	
Ch.	18‐Ch.	21	
Ch.	17‐Ch.	20	
Remark:	Please	read	lecture	note	whenever	N.A.	is	mentioned	above.	
	
Further	reading:	Interested	students	could	read	Ch.	25	(5th	or	6th	edition)	or	Ch.	24	(7th	edition)	
after	you	complete	the	whole	course.	This	chapter	is	not	required	for	examination	but	you	will	be	
more	impressed	by	the	theories	that	you	have	learned	if	you	know	its	history	of	developments.		

