ECON2001 : Intermediate Microeconomics
Course Lecturers:
Term 1 Professor Martin Cripps
Email: m.cripps@ucl.ac.uk
Room 122 Drayton House
Office Hour Friday 1:00-2:00
Term 2 Professor Ian Preston
Email: i.preston@ucl.ac.uk
Room 207 Drayton House
Office Hour: Friday 1:30-2:30
Class Teachers
Term 1: Claudia Cerrone; Michele Gianola; Homa Esfahanian; Shilan Dargahi; Alireza
Kharazi; Amairisa Kouki
Term 2: Shilan Dargahi; Alireza Kharazi; Amairisa Kouki; Francesca Parodi
Aims: This course is designed to provide students with a rigorous grounding in the core
concepts and methods of Microeconomics. At the end of the course the student should:
(a) Understand microeconomic theory at a level appropriate for an economics graduate.
(b) Understand how to analyse microeconomic models using appropriate techniques.
(c) Be able to address economic phenomena using these models and techniques.
Texts: The main text for this course is Microeconomics: Principles and Analysis [F. Cowell, OUP
2006 (ISBN 0-19-926777-4)]. This can be supplemented with the easier books: Microeconomic
Theory: Basic Principles and Extensions [Nicholson, South-Western 2005] and Intermediate
Microeconomics [Varian, Norton 2003]. A more advanced book for an ambitious student is:
Microeconomics [Gravelle and Rees, Pearson 2004].
Other Materials:
Copies of the slides for lectures and demonstration lectures, problem sets and answers will
be posted on the course website.
Examination Format:
Three hours; Part A of the paper is 20 multiple choice questions and TWO from Part B
(longer problem questions). Answers to Part B to include ONE from Part BI and ONE from
Part BII. (For affiliate students: Two Hours; the questions from Part A and ONE question
from Part B.)
Required Coursework:
Four problem sets for Term 1 and four problem sets for Term 2.

Course Outline and Syllabus
Term 1:

1) Games in Strategic and Extensive Form: Cowell Chapter 10
a) Strategic forms, dominance, Nash equilibrium.
b) Extensive forms, backwards induction and subgame perfection.
2) Oligopoly and Monopoly: Cowell Chapters 10, 3
a) Static models of oligopoly: Cournot, Bertrand and differentiated product
competition; auctions.
b) Dynamic models of oligopoly: Stackelberg, commitment and collusion
c) Monopoly
3) The Perfectly Competitive Firm: Cowell Chapters 2 and 3
a) Production functions, Cost Functions, Input Demands.
b) Scale and Homogeneity, Duality, LR and SR costs
4) Adverse Selection: Signalling and Hidden Information: Cowell Chapter 11.
a) Lemons and signals in insurance models.
b) Screening and product provision.
c) Non-Linear Pricing
5) Incentives and Moral Hazard: Cowell Chapter 11 and 12
a) Principals and Agents
b) Incentive compatibility and individual rationality
c) Providing incentives for workers.
6) Designing Economic Systems: Cowell Chapter 12
Term 2:
6) Consumer Demand: Cowell Chapter 4
a) Budget constraints  
b) Revealed preference  
c) Preferences and utility, duality  
d) Consumer surplus and price indices 
7) Demand with endowments: Cowell Chapter 5
a) Labour supply  
b) Intertemporal choice  
8) Uncertainty: Cowell Chapter 8  
9) General equilibrium: Cowell Chapter 6 and 7
a) Exchange equilibrium  
b) Equilibrium with production  
c) Welfare theorems  

