ECON2101

Microeconomics 2
Semester 2, 2017
Building upon material introduced in Microeconomics 1, this course aims to provide a solid
understanding of basic microeconomic theory and the ability to apply those tools and ideas. Models
describing the economic behaviour of individual decision-makers and the outcomes of markets are
developed and applied to examine the welfare of market participants. Questions addressed include:
What influences consumer demand decisions and how? How do firms decide on how much to produce
and how much inputs to use? How do prices function to coordinate economic activity? What is meant
by economic efficiency? When do markets fail to achieve efficient outcomes? Training in economic
analysis is achieved via weekly tutorials that go over problem sets linked to material presented in
lectures. Overall, the course takes an analytical approach emphasising rigorous logical reasoning and
economic problem solving.

Mode of Delivery
Prerequisites
Course Convener:

On campus
ECON1101 Microeconomics 1
Professor Kieron Meagher

Phone:
Email:
Office hours for student
consultation:
Research Interests

(02) 61259535
Kieron.meagher@anu.edu.au
See course website on Wattle

RSE Student Office

Organizational economics, political economy and
spatial economics.
Nicole Millar

Phone:
Email:

02 6125 0384
enquiries.rse@anu.edu.au

RSE Student Homepage
Tutor(s) (optional)

http://www.rse.anu.edu.au/students
Please check course website for details.

1 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

COURSE OVERVIEW
Learning Outcomes
Students who successfully complete this course should be able to:
1. describe the main microeconomic/neoclassical theory of consumer and producer
behaviour
2. apply economic concepts to solve for choices made by consumers and producers
3. assess the economic efficiency of market outcomes for different market structures,
in the presence of externalities, and/or when influenced by government intervention
4. compare and contrast the information needed for markets or for the government to
allocate resources efficiently
Assessment Summary
Assessment Task

Value

1. In class workshop 25%
quizzes
2.Mid-semester
25%
exam

3.

50%

Due Date

Date for Return of Linked
Assessment
Learning
Outcomes
(optional)
Approximately
We aim to have
1-4
weekly
these assessment
returned in
Week 6,
1-4
(provisional). To approximately 2
teaching weeks
be advised in
ANU midsession after the
exam timetable. assessment
Final exam period
1-4

The arrangements for the mid-semester exam depend on enrolments for this course. Any
changes and details about the mid-semester exam will be posted on Wattle.
Who to Contact and How
Questions related to the teaching material should be directed to your tutor during tutorial or
to any tutor during drop in consultation times. The lecturer also welcomes questions during
(time-permitting) or after lecture.
Questions about tutorial allocations should be directed by email to the Course
Administrator using enquiries.rse@anu.edu.au . For other administrative matters, please
speak to your tutor during/after tutorials in the first instance and by email to the Head Tutor
in the second instance (see course website on Wattle). Please use only your ANU student
number email address to send and receive emails.
Email should only be used to contact staff about administrative matters and not for
instructional purposes. Staff do not respond to emailed questions about teaching material.
Due to the very large course enrolment, please allow a few days to receive a response.
While phone contact details have been provided, we greatly prefer for contact to be done
through email as described above.

2 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Research-Led Teaching
The teaching methodology in this course is strongly motivated by recent research in
cognitive science on the positive long-term effects of effortful recall on retention.
Feedback
Staff Feedback
This course will feature an almost continuous feedback methodology. We will run multiple
choices quizzes in most of the workshops during the semester. You will receive your score
as feedback of your learning. Class level learning needs will be identified from each of the
quizzes and as a result material will be retaught or extended in the workshop.
You will also receive informal feedback through participating in tutorials.
Student Feedback
ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks feedback
from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is through Student
Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in these surveys is
anonymous and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee and Academic Board with
opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on ANU
courses, go to
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/

Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure
that staff and students are aware of the University’s academic standards, and implement
them. You can find the University’s education policies and an explanatory glossary at:
http://policies.anu.edu.au/
Students are expected to have read the Academic Misconduct Rules 2014 before the
commencement of their course.
Other key policies include:
• Student Assessment (Coursework)
• Student Surveys and Evaluations
Examination material or equipment (provisional)
Simple calculators.
The binding details for the final exam will be given in the University’s final exam timetable
http://timetable.anu.edu.au/exams/
Recommended Resources
The main textbook for this course is:
Nicholson, W., & Snyder, C., 2015, Intermediate Microeconomics and its Applications, 12th edition,
Cengage Learning, USA.

3 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

COURSE SCHEDULE
This course typically consists of following weekly activities: 2 hours of lectures, 1 hour
workshop including quiz (Monday) and 1 hour tutorial. Due to 2 public holidays on
Monday’s during the semester we will loose a few of the workshops as detailed below.

Week/
Session
1
2
3
4
5
6

Summary of Activities

Assessment this week

2 lectures
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 tutorial

7
8
9
10
11
12

2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
2 lectures, 1 workshop, 1 tutorial
Examination period

None
In workshop quiz
In workshop quiz
In workshop quiz
None
Mid-semester exam
(provisional). See ANU
mid-semester exam
timetable.
In workshop quiz
In workshop quiz
In workshop quiz
In workshop quiz
None
None

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS

The ANU is using Turnitin to enhance student citation and referencing techniques, and to
assess assignment submissions as a component of the University's approach to managing
Academic Integrity. For additional information regarding Turnitin please visit the ANU
Online website.
Students may choose not to submit assessment items through Turnitin. In this instance
you will be required to submit, alongside the assessment item itself, copies of all
references included in the assessment item.
As a further academic integrity control, students may be selected for a 15 minute
individual oral examination of their written assessment submissions.
Any student identified, either during the current semester or in retrospect, as having
used ghost writing services will be investigated under the University’s Academic
Misconduct Rule.

4 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Assessment Tasks
Assessment Task 1: In workshop quizzes
Details of task: Mainly multiple-choice but perhaps short answer questions. All of the
material taught prior to that week’s quiz is potentially examinable. Simple calculators are
recommended
Value: 25%. The worst mark awarded for the quizzes will be dropped in calculating the average. If
a valid medical certificate or similar excuse is provided for any missed quiz the assessment weight
for the missed item will be transferred to the remaining quizzes.
Estimated return date: Approximately 2 weeks after each quiz.

Assessment Task 2: Mid-semester exam.
Details of task: The mid-semester exam is optional, although strongly recommended, and
redeemable. All material covered prior to the exam is potentially examinable. Time,
location etc. will reflect central examinations section requirements. There will be no
deferred examination for this exam.
Simple calculators are recommended.
Value: 25% (0%)
Estimated return date: Approximately 2 teaching weeks after the exam

Assessment Task 3: Final exam.
Details of task: The final exam will cover material presented throughout the semester and will be
held during the university examination period.
Value: 50% (75%)
The course mark percentages above in parentheses apply to those who do not sit the midsemester exam as well as to those whose course mark would be higher if the redeemable
mid-semester exam mark is set aside.

5 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Tentative Topics Schedule
Please note this schedule is a draft and subject to changes. Any changes will be announced in
lectures and posted on Wattle.
Chapter of Text Book*

Topic

0. Introduction
Methodology	for	this	course	

1. Consumer Behaviour
Consumer Utility and Choice

2

Demand Curves

3

Choice Under Uncertainty

4

2. Firm Behaviour
Production

6

Cost in the Short Run and Long Run

7

Profit	maximisation	and	Supply	

8

3. The Competitive Model
The Price Taking Firm

9

General Equilibrium and Welfare

10

4. Market Power
Monopoly

11

5. Extensions and Applications
Capital and Time

14

Asymmetric Information

15

Externalities	and	Public	Goods

16

*

Not all material in each chapter will be covered.

Scaling
Your final mark for the course will be based on the raw marks allocated for each of your
assessment items. However, your final mark may not be the same number as produced by
that formula, as marks may be scaled. Any scaling applied will preserve the rank order of
raw marks (i.e. if your raw mark exceeds that of another student, then your scaled mark
will exceed the scaled mark of that student), and may be either up or down.

6 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Privacy Notice
The ANU has made a number of third party, online, databases available for students to
use. Use of each online database is conditional on student end users first agreeing to the
database licensor’s terms of service and/or privacy policy. Students should read these
carefully.
In some cases student end users will be required to register an account with the database
licensor and submit personal information, including their: first name; last name; ANU email
address; and other information.
In cases where student end users are asked to submit ‘content’ to a database, such as an
assignment or short answers, the database licensor may only use the student’s ‘content’ in
accordance with the terms of service – including any (copyright) licence the student grants
to the database licensor.
Any personal information or content a student submits may be stored by the licensor,
potentially offshore, and will be used to process the database service in accordance with
the licensors terms of service and/or privacy policy.
If any student chooses not to agree to the database licensor’s terms of service or privacy
policy, the student will not be able to access and use the database. In these
circumstances students should contact their lecturer to enquire about alternative
arrangements that are available.
Tutorial Seminar Registration
Tutorial signup for this course will be done via the Wattle website. Detailed information
about signup times will be provided on Wattle or during your first lecture. When tutorials
are available for enrolment, follow these steps:
1. Log on to Wattle, and go to the course site
2. Click on the link “Tutorial enrolment”
3. On the right of the screen, click on the tab “Become Member of…..” for the tutorial
class you wish to enter
4. Confirm your choice
If you need to change your enrolment, you will be able to do so by clicking on the tab
“Leave group….” and then re-enrol in another group. You will not be able to enrol in
groups that have reached their maximum number. Please note that enrolment in ISIS
must be finalised for you to have access to Wattle.
SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is
available online from http://students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/

7 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

