Econ 205 Spring 2017
Syllabus

Instructor and Head TA
Professor Rachel Kranton
rachel.kranton@duke.edu
Office: 219 Social Sciences
Office hours: Mondays 1-3 pm
Head TA (HTA)
Yasha Miami
ebs30@duke.edu
Office:
Office hours: Friday 2-4 pm
Textbook
Nicholson and Snyder, Microeconomic Theory. Cengage Learning, Twelfth Edition,
2017.
Course Requirements
The course requires regular attendance in lecture and discussion sections,
completion of problem sets, quizzes, and exams.
Discussion Sections
Students are assigned a weekly discussion section lead by a Teaching Assistant. The
material discussed in each section will be determined weekly based on students’
feedback, concerning topics that require additional review. The Head TA will
organize obtaining this feedback from students.
Office Hours
The instructor, the HTA, the TA’s, and the undergraduate teaching assistants will be
holding office hours throughout the week. Please use these office hours to discuss
problem sets, lecture material, etc. Office hours will be posted on Sakai.

Course Grade: Exams, Quizzes, Problem Sets
The course grades are based on problem sets, quizzes, and three exams. There is no
curve in the class per se, and students are not competing with each other for grades.
Grades are assigned to reflect a student's mastery of the material as indicated by
cumulative performance on the assignments and the exams. Each student could
receive an A, for example, if each student performs well on all the elements of the
course, with the grades assigned as explained below.
Exams
Eighty percent of a student’s course score is earned through exam points. There will
be two midterms and a final – with a total of 300 exam points, 75 from each
midterm and 150 from the final. The final exam score will replace any midterm
score that is below the final exam score. If the student’s final exam score is higher
(percentage wise) than one midterm, that midterm score is dropped and the final
becomes 75% of the student’s total exam points. If the student’s final exam score is
higher (percentage wise) than both midterms, both midterm scores are dropped
and the final becomes 100% of the student’s total exam points.
There are no make-up exams for midterms. If a student misses a midterm exam for
any reason, then points from that midterm will be allocated to the final exam. For
example, if a student misses the second midterm, the final exam counts for 75% of
the student’s exam points.
If a student misses the final exam and has a dean’s excuse, a make-up final exam will
be given.
Note that the exam average is not based on a student's performance relative to the
class on each individual exam. The exam average is based on total number of points
accumulated over the semester.
The dates of the exams and other exam policies are below.
Quizzes
Ten percent of the course score will derive from ten in-class quizzes given over the
semester. The quizzes are designed to give students the incentive to steadily keep
pace with the course material and will be based on material recently covered in
lecture. Each quiz will have a grade of 0, 0.8, or 1, with 0 indicating the student did
not take the quiz or did not use an appropriate strategy to answer the question, 0.8
indicating the student took the quiz and used an appropriate strategy to answer the
question, and 1 indicating a completely correct answer. It is possible a student will
receive a grade somewhere between 0.8 and 1 if the answer is between the criteria
for those two grades.

Quizzes will be given at the end of class, and a student can only take a quiz if the
student has attended the full class session.
There will be no make-up quizzes for any reason. If a student does not take a quiz,
the grade for that quiz is 0.
Each student’s average quiz score will be based on the top six quiz scores over the
course of the semester.
Problem Sets
Ten percent of the course score is earned by completion and submission of the
eleven problem sets assigned during the term. Problem sets are an integral part of
the course, and success in the course is highly unlikely without timely completion of
the problem sets.
Students are encouraged to work together on the problem sets but must submit
individually written answers. Students must write the names of other students
with whom they worked on the top of their submitted problem set.
Each problem set is given a score of 0, 0.7 or 1, where 0 indicates the problem set
was not completed or not turned in on time. A 0.7 indicates the problem set was
completed and turned in one time. One problem, selected at random, from each
problem set will be graded; if the problem set was completed and turned in on time
and the student uses an appropriate strategy to solve the selected problem, the
problem set grade is a 1.
If a problem set is not turned in on time for any reason, the grade is 0 for that
problem set.
Problem set average will be based on the top 7 problem set grades for the semester.
Problem sets should be uploaded by the due date/time to your Dropbox folder on
Sakai. Unless otherwise announced, problem sets are due on Mondays and must be
by midnight of the due date. Note that problem sets can be submitted early. No late
problem sets will be accepted. The HTA will discuss procedures further.
Course Scores and Conversion to Letter Grades
A student’s course score is calculated as follows:
(0.80) x (exam average) +
(0.10) x (quiz average) +
(0.10) x (problem set average)

If the median course score of the class is 85 or above, letter grades are assigned
according to each student’s course score.
If the median of the class is below 85, each student’s course score is increased by the
difference between the class median and 85 to yield adjusted course scores. For
example, if the median score is 82.7, then each student’s score is increased by 2.3.
Letter grades are then assigned according to each student’s adjusted course score,
except for the letter grade of A+, as described below.
Letter grades are assigned using the following chart:

Letter Grade
A
AB+
B
BC+
C
CD+
D
D-

Cut-off Course Score
95
90
87
83
80
77
73
70
65
60
55

The letter grade of A+ is given for overall exceptional performance in the course. To
earn a letter grade of A+, a student’s individual exam average must be at least 95%,
individual quiz average must be at least 95%, and individual problem set average
must be 100%.
Exam Schedule
The exam schedule is:
Midterm #1: Wednesday Feb. 15 in class (date subject to change)
Midterm #2: Wednesday March 29 in class (date subject to change)
Final: Tuesday May 2 9am-noon Social Sciences 139
Midterm #2 is cumulative and approximately 30% of points derive from the first
third of the course and 70% from the second third.
The final exam is cumulative and approximately 30% of points derive from the first
third of the course, 30% from the second third, and 40% from the last third.

Re-grading- Rescoring of Exams
If a student thinks an exam (midterm and/or final) has been scored incorrectly, it is
possible to petition for a re-grading of the exam. The petition must be typed and
submitted to the HTA in writing - by email - within 24 hours of receiving the graded
exam. The HTA decides whether or not to accept the petition. If the petition is
accepted, the entire exam will be re-graded, which could result in a lower total score.
A student must submit this petition for any re-grading, including the case that the
points were not added up correctly.
Lecture Notes
Lecture notes will be posted on Sakai after each lecture. The lecture notes will
consist of the explanations, graphs, equations, applications, problems, etc. that the
instructor writes in real time during the lecture. (A pdf is created from a jnt file.)
While useful, the notes will be not comprehensive; the lectures will involve
explanations that are verbal and also occur in response to students’ questions.
While the posted lecture notes should be a useful aid, they are not a substitute for
attending class.
Academic Integrity
Students can work together on problem sets, as discussed above. Each student must
turn in their solutions and write-ups, respectively.
On quizzes and exams any form of colluding, copying, or using unauthorized
materials is strictly prohibited. Students are expected to uphold the Duke
Community Standard http://studentaffairs.duke.edu/conduct/about-us/dukecommunity-standard.
Difficulties Completing Coursework or Taking the Final Exam
PAY ATTENTION TO THIS: Be sure and contact your academic dean in due time
for any issues that interfere with completing coursework during the semester
and up to and including the day and time of the final exam.
There is nothing the instructor can do or consider (such as difficulties the student
may have faced during the semester) to adjust a student’s course grade. These are
all matters for the student's Dean. The instructor must use the same grading criteria
for all students.
Only a student's dean can excuse a student from the final exam. If a student takes
the final exam but then feels there were extenuating circumstances (illness, etc.)
that interfered with the student’s performance, there is nothing the instructor can
do to adjust the student’s score and course grade.

The only circumstance in which an instructor can change a course grade after
coursework is complete is the case where there was an instructor error in
transcription or error in calculation of scores.
For the Trinity policies on grades and exams, including absence from final exams,
withdrawing from course, and grade changes, see
http://trinity.duke.edu/undergraduate/academic-policies/grades-exams
Class Schedule and Textbook Chapters
The schedule on the next page is ambitious and approximate. We will most likely
adjust as the course proceeds.
Topics discussed in lectures are the core items of the course and the topics for
which students are responsible on exams. Chapter #’s are for reference. The class
will not cover every topic in the textbook chapters.
COURSE SCHEDULE ECON 205 SPRING 2017

Wednesday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday

January 11
January 16
January 18
January 23
January 25
January 30
January 30
February 1
February 6
February 6
February 8
February 13
February 13

Wednesday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
SPRING BREAK
Monday
Monday
Wednesday

February 15
February 20
February 22
February 27
February 27
March 1
March 6
March 6
March 8
SPRING BR
March 20
March 20
March 22

Class Overview – Consumer Theory
MLK DAY – No Class
Consumer Preferences & Utility – Chapter 3
Utility Maximization – Chapter 4
Expenditure Minimization – Chapter 4
Problem Set #1 due
Demand – Chapter 4-5
Income and Substitution Effects – Chapter 5
Problem Set #2 due
Welfare Analysis – Chapter 5
Welfare Analysis – Chapter 5
Problem Set #3 due
Labor Supply, Intertemporal Choice – Chapter 16,
Chapter 17
Midterm Exam #1
Production – Chapter 9
Production, Costs – Chapter 9, Chapter 10
Problem Set #4 due
Costs – Chapter 10
Profit Maximization – Chapter 11
Problem Set #5 due
Supply – Chapter 11
Competitive Markets – Chapter 12
SPRING BREAK
Problem Set #6 due
Monopoly – Chapter 14
Price Discrimination - Chapter 14

Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Monday
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Tuesday

March 27
March 27
March 29
April 3
April 5
April 10
April 10
April 12
April 17
April 17
April 19
April 24
April 24
April 26
April 29
May 2

Problem Set #7 due
General Equilibrium – Chapter 13
Midterm Exam #2
Basics of Game Theory – Chapter 8
Game Theory – Chapter 8
Problem Set #8 due
Game Theory & Oligopoly – Chapter 15
Oligopoly – Chapter 15
Problem Set #9 due
Public Goods – Chapter 19
Risk & Uncertainty – Chapter 7
Problem set # 10 due
Asymmetric Information – Chapter 18
Asymmetric Information – Chapter 18
Problem set # 11 due
FINAL EXAM

