Econ 1101

MICROECONOMICS 1
Semester 2, 2017
The course examines how individuals and firms make decisions by weighing up costs
and benefits, and how the interaction of their decisions leads to market and social
outcomes. The model of market supply and demand is employed to examine the effects
of taxes, subsidies, and other government interventions in market activity. The
implications of different market structures, including perfect competition and monopoly,
are examined. Public goods, externalities and common resources are key examples of
cases in which private markets may yield social sub-optimal outcomes. Such cases are
examined the role of government policy in correcting for these is discussed.
Mode of Delivery

On campus

Prerequisites

No formal prerequisites

Incompatible Courses

None

Co-taught Courses

None

Course Convener:

Zach Ward

Phone:

61253363

Email:

Zach.Ward@anu.edu

Office hours for student
consultation:

Crisp 2081

Research Interests

Labour, Economic History

RSE Student Office

Nicole Millar

Phone:

61250384

Email:

Zach.Ward@anu.edu.au N.B. include ECON 1101 in
the subject line and your student number

Email(s):

Enquiries.rse@anu.edu

Tutor(s)

To be determined

Available for consultation after lecture

SEMESTER 2
2017

COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Description

The course examines how individuals and firms make decisions by weighing up
costs and benefits, and how the interaction of their decisions leads to market and
social outcomes. The model of market supply and demand is employed to examine
the effects of taxes, subsidies, and other government interventions in market activity.
The implications of different market structures, including perfect competition and
monopoly, are examined. Public goods, externalities and common resources are
key examples of cases in which private markets may yield socially sub-optimal
outcomes. Such cases are examined and the role of government policy in correcting
for these is discussed.
Learning Outcomes

On satisfying the requirements for this course, students will:
• understand the economic principles that underpin modern economics;
• have a basic understanding of the way budget constrained individuals make
optimising choices and the way resources are allocated in private markets;
• understand the role of different trading arrangements in markets and their impact
on prices and the quantities traded;
• use basic economic principles to evaluate the effects of government interventions
and other exogenous changes in markets;
• be able to evaluate the effects of government interventions in markets;
• present clearly written analysis of economic issues and problems
Assessment Summary
Assessment Task

Value

Due Date

Date for Return of
Assessment

Quizzes in Tutorial

15%

Weeks 3-12

Week following quiz.
Returned in tutorial

Mid-Semester Exam

35% (or 0%)

Week 7
(tentative)

Arrangements to view script
books will be posted on
Wattle

Final Exam

50% (or 85%)

Exam Weeks

(1) Tutorial Quizzes – 15 %
Six times in tutorial during Teaching Weeks 3-12, your tutor will administer a brief quiz with a
question linked to lectures and readings of the preceding week and relatedly, to the tutorial
questions of that week. They will be graded as Excellent (3 marks), Satisfactory (2 marks),
Unsatisfactory (1 mark) or No Credit (NC, 0 markets). The best five of the six quiz marks will
count. No makeup quizzes will be scheduled. Students must take quizzes in their enrolled
tutorial.
(2) Mid-Semester Exam – 35% (0%) of course mark
The mid-semester exam is optional, although strongly recommended, and redeemable.
Tentatively, the exam will be in Teaching Week 7, but the exact date and time will be

decided by the ANU Examinations Section. There will be no deferred examination for this
exam.
(3) Final Exam – 50% (85%) of course mark
The final exam will cover material presented throughout the semester and will be held during
the university examination period.
The course mark percentages above in parentheses apply to those who do not sit the midsemester exam as well as to those whose course mark would be higher if the redeemable
mid-semester exam is set aside.
The mid-semester and final exams assess a student’s understanding and mastery of the
material. Further information about the exam structure will be provided in lecture before the
exam data. The motivation behind the tutorial quizzes is to encourage students to keep up
with the lectures and readings, work on the tutorial questions, and attend tutorial which are
vital in succeeding in this course. The quiz questions may take the form of, for example,
defining an important concept recently introduced in lecture or setting up or explaining an
important aspect necessary to solve one of the tutorial questions.
Unlike some of the tutorial questions, answering the quiz questions should be
straightforward even if one has not yet completely mastered the material. Most students who
make a serious effort to keep up with the course and prepare for tutorial should be able to
answer the quiz questions and can expect to achieve at least a Satisfactory grade for their
answer.
Your “raw” course mark will be based on the raw marks for the above three assessment
components appropriately weighted. The final course mark may differ from the raw course
mark if scaling is necessary. Scaling may be up or down. Any scaling applied, however, will
present the rank order of the raw mark. That is, if your raw course mark exceeds or equals
that of another student’s, then your scaled course mark will be no less than the other
student’s.

Feedback
Staff Feedback
Feedback provided via verbal comments to students in tutorial and at the Help Desk as well
as in lecture to the whole class.
Student Feedback
ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks
feedback from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is
through Student Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in
these surveys is anonymous and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee
and Academic Board with opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for
improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on
ANU courses, go to
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/

Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure that
staff and students are aware of the University’s academic standards, and implement them.
You can find the University’s education policies and an explanatory glossary at:
http://policies.anu.edu.au/

Students are expected to have read the Academic Misconduct Rule before the
commencement of their course.
Other key policies include:
•
•

Student Assessment (Coursework)
Student Surveys and Evaluations

Required Resources
Commonwealth supported students and domestic full-fee paying students generally must be
able to complete the requirements of their program of study without the imposition of fees
that are additional to the student contribution amount or tuition fees.
Provided that its payment is in accordance with the Act, a fee is of a kind that is into any one
or more of the following categories:
(a)

It is a charge for a good or service that is not essential to the course of study.

(b)

It is a charge for an alternative form, or alternative forms, of access to a good or
service that is an essential component of the course of study but is otherwise made
readily available at no additional fee by the higher education provider.

(c)

It is a charge for an essential good or service that the student has the choice of
acquiring from a supplier other than the higher education provider and is for:
(i)

equipment or items which become the physical property of the student and are not
consumed during the course of study; or

(ii) food, transport and accommodation costs associated with the provision of field
trips that form part of the course of study.
(d)

It is a fine or a penalty provided it is imposed principally as a disincentive and not in
order to raise revenue or cover administrative costs.

Examination material or equipment
Will be announced in lecture before exams.
Recommended Resources
Principles of Microeconomics: Australia and New Zealand Edition. Joshua Gans, Stephen
King, Martin Byford and N. Gregory Mankiw. Edition 6. ISBN 9780170248525

COURSE SCHEDULE

Week/
Summary of Activities
Session

Assessment

1

Lectures

2

Lectures, tutorials

3

Lectures, tutorials

4

Lectures, tutorials

5

Lectures, tutorials

Tutorial quiz

6

Lectures, tutorials

Tutorial quiz

7

Lectures, tutorials

Mid-semester exam
(tentative)

8

Lectures, tutorials

Tutorial quiz

9

Lectures, tutorials

10

Lectures, tutorials

11

Lectures, tutorials

12

Lectures, tutorials

Tutorial quiz

Tutorial quiz

Tutorial quiz

Examination period

Course Outline
I.

Introduction to Economic Thinking (Chapters 1-3)

II.

Supply and Demand (Chapters 4-6)

III.

Welfare Analysis (Chapters 7-9)

IV.

When markets fail (Chapters 10-12)

V.

Introduction to Industrial organization (Chapters 13-18)

VI.

Labour economics (Chapters 19-21)

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
The ANU is using Turnitin to enhance student citation and referencing techniques, and to
assess assignment submissions as a component of the University's approach to managing

Academic Integrity. For additional information regarding Turnitin please visit the ANU Online
website.
Students may choose not to submit assessment items through Turnitin. In this instance you
will be required to submit, alongside the assessment item itself, copies of all references
included in the assessment item.
As a further academic integrity control, students may be selected for a 15 minute individual
oral examination of their written assessment submissions.
Any student identified, either during the current semester or in retrospect, as having used
ghost writing services will be investigated under the University’s Academic Misconduct Rule.
Privacy Notice
The ANU has made a number of third party, online, databases available for students to use.
Use of each online database is conditional on student end users first agreeing to the
database licensor’s terms of service and/or privacy policy. Students should read these
carefully.
In some cases student end users will be required to register an account with the database
licensor and submit personal information, including their: first name; last name; ANU email
address; and other information.
In cases where student end users are asked to submit ‘content’ to a database, such as an
assignment or short answers, the database licensor may only use the student’s ‘content’ in
accordance with the terms of service – including any (copyright) licence the student grants to
the database licensor.
Any personal information or content a student submits may be stored by the licensor,
potentially offshore, and will be used to process the database service in accordance with the
licensors terms of service and/or privacy policy.
If any student chooses not to agree to the database licensor’s terms of service or privacy
policy, the student will not be able to access and use the database. In these circumstances
students should contact their lecturer to enquire about alternative arrangements that are
available.

Tutorial Seminar Registration
Tutorial signup for this course will be done via the Wattle website. Detailed information
about signup times will be provided on Wattle or during your first lecture. When tutorials are
available for enrolment, follow these steps:
1. Log on to Wattle, and go to the course site
2. Click on the link “Tutorial enrolment”
3. On the right of the screen, click on the tab “Become Member of…..” for the tutorial
class you wish to enter
4. Confirm your choice
If you need to change your enrolment, you will be able to do so until the end of Week 2 by
clicking on the tab “Leave group….” and then re-enrol in another group. You will not be able
to enrol in groups that have reached their maximum number. Please note that enrolment in
ISIS must be finalised for you to have access to Wattle.

After Week 2, tutorial changes will only be considered under exceptional circumstances and
must be approved by the Course Administrator, Nicole Millar. Students must attend the
tutorial section that they are enrolled in.

SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is
available online from http://students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/

