EMET3004

Econometris II: Econometric Models
This course presents and develops techniques necessary for the quantitative analysis of economic
and business problems that are beyond the scope of the simple linear regression model covered in
EMET2007 or STAT2008. Topics include: endogeneity, instrumental variables estimation, natural
experiments, binary dependent variables, and panel data estimation. This is a hand-on course
with a focus on applications in economics as well as business. A standard statistical software will
be used during computer sessions, no special programming skills are required.

Mode of Delivery
Prerequisites

Incompatible Courses
Co-taught Courses
Course Convener:
Phone:
Email:
Office hours for student consultation:
Research Interests
Student administrator
Phone:
Email:

On campus
ECON1101 and STAT2008;
or
EMET2007
EMET6008
EMET6008
Juergen Meinecke
56184
juergen.meinecke at anu.edu.au
Thu 9:45-11:15
Econometrics, computational things
Nicole Millar
50384
enquiries@anu.edu.au
SEMESTER 2
2017

COURSE OVERVIEW
Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of the requirements for this course, students will
1. understand the challenges of empirical modelling in economics and business
2. understand the shortcomings of the standard linear regression model
3. be able to apply important extensions to the linear regression model
4. be able to express new econometric methods mathematically
5. be able to think clearly about the relationship between data, model and estimation in econometrics
6. use statistical software to study actual data sets

Assessment Summary
1.
2.
3.
4.

Assessment Task
Assignment 1
Assignment 2
Participation
Final Exam

Value
20%
20%
10%
50%

Due Date
28 August
16 October
Weeks 2-11

Date for Return to Students
18 September
24 October
Week 12

Research-Led Teaching
This course teaches state-of-the-art methods and practices in econometrics. We will use applications and data sets from recently published papers in top academic journals.

Feedback
Staff Feedback
Students will be given feedback in the following forms in this course:
• Solution suggestions of past exams will be offered.
• Verbal feedback will be given in the computer tutorials.
• Written comments, if necessary, will be included in assignments returned to students.
• Verbal comments, if necessary, will be provided during consultation.

Student Feedback
ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks feedback
from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is through Student Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in these surveys is
anonymous and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee and Academic Board
with opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on ANU
courses, go to
http : //unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
http : //unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/

Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure that staff
and students are aware of the Universitys academic standards, and implement them. You can find
the Universitys education policies and an explanatory glossary at: http : //policies.anu.edu.au/
Students are expected to have read the Academic Misconduct Rule before the commencement of
their course.
Other key policies include:
• Student Assessment (Coursework)
• Student Surveys and Evaluations

Required Resources
Textbook
The textbook for the course is Introduction to Econometrics (updated third edition, 2014) by Stock
and Watson. Chiefly library has several copies of the textbook. I strongly recommend that you buy
a copy of the book as I base the lecture and practice sessions on it.
Other excellent textbooks include A Guide to Modern Econometrics by Verbeek and Introductory
Econometrics: A Modern Approach 5ed, by Wooldridge. (There is no need to buy these, however.)
Software
The econometric software for this course is “Stata” Here’s a quick wiki summary of what Stata
is: http : //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stata. From my own experience, Stata is an exhaustive, welldocumented, powerful and user-friendly statistical software. We will get to know Stata during the
tutorial in a “learning-by-doing manner” Stata is available in the ANU computer labs. You do not
need to purchase your own Stata license.

Examination material or equipment
None permitted

COURSE SCHEDULE
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Summary of Activities
Review of OLS Estimation
Unbiasedness, Consistency, CLT
Identification and Endogneity
Instrumental Variables Estimation
Instrumental Variables Estimation
Instrumental Variables Estimation
(Quasi)-Experiments
(Quasi)-Experiments
Binary Dependent Variables
Binary Dependent Variables
Panel Data Estimation
Panel Data Estimation
Examination Period

Assessment

Assignment 1

Assignment 2
Final Exam

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
As a further academic integrity control, students may be selected for a 15 minute individual oral
examination of their written assessment submissions.
Any student identified, either during the current semester or in retrospect, as having used ghost
writing services will be investigated under the University’s Academic Misconduct Rule.

Assessment Tasks
Participation
Your participation is an essential part in the overall learning experience (both for you as well as
your classmates!) in the course. I will evaluate you on your participation during the computer
tutorial sessions. By participation I specifically mean:
• answering questions
• asking relevant and helpful questions
Feel free to participate and contribute to these sessions. Do not be afraid to give ‘wrong‘ answers;
as long as you are constructively engaged, there is no such thing as a wrong answer. After every
tutorial your tutor will take note of students who participated in class and at the end of the semester
I will aggregate these numbers to an overall participation mark. Roughly, I will give 10 marks to
regular participators, 5 marks to occasional participators and zero marks to students who rarely
or never participate. Feel free to seek feedback from me or your tutor during the semester on your
participation performance.
Do not confuse participation with attendance! In order to participate, you do need to attend. But
in addition you also need to contribute to the tutorial discussion. (Attendance is necessary but not
sufficient for participation.)

Assignments
Working through exercises is an effective method of learning econometrics, as it is with most mathematical subjects. That means that the assignments are more than simply part of the assessment
for the course. Students will be required to submit two written assignments during the semester.
The assignments will require computer work as well as analytical work. These assignments should
be your own work. You may discuss assignments with classmates, but you should do all your own
computing and writing of the assignments. It is an offense against the Universitys regulations to
copy from other students assignments.
Assignments should be submitted in hard copy by dropping them into a specially labeled assignment box at the Research School of Economics. (Contact the Student Administrator for details.)
The front page of the submitted assignments must show your name, student number and the
course name (EMET3004/6008). Assignments missing any of this information will receive a mark
of zero.
Assignments must be submitted by 3pm on the due date. Further details about assignment submission will be given during lectures.
Extensions for Assignments
No submission of assignments without an extension after the due date will be permitted. If an
assessment task is not submitted by the due date, a mark of 0 will be awarded.
Returning Assignments
Assignments will be returned to you during your regular tutorial.
Resubmission of Assignments
Resubmission of assignments is not permitted.
Final Examination
The final exam is compulsory. Examinable material covers the whole semester. The exam will be
marked out of 100.
The final exam will be held in the exam period at the end of the semester. Details will be posted
on the ANU exam timetable site.

Scaling
Your final mark for the course will be based on the raw marks allocated for each of your assessment items. However, your final mark may not be the same number as produced by that formula,
as marks may be scaled. Any scaling applied will preserve the rank order of raw marks (i.e. if your
raw mark exceeds that of another student, then your scaled mark will exceed the scaled mark of
that student), and may be either up or down.

Privacy Notice
The ANU has made a number of third party, online, databases available for students to use. Use of
each online database is conditional on student end users first agreeing to the database licensors
terms of service and/or privacy policy. Students should read these carefully.
In some cases student end users will be required to register an account with the database licensor
and submit personal information, including their: first name; last name; ANU email address; and
other information.
In cases where student end users are asked to submit content to a database, such as an assignment or short answers, the database licensor may only use the students content in accordance
with the terms of service including any (copyright) licence the student grants to the database licensor.
Any personal information or content a student submits may be stored by the licensor, potentially
offshore, and will be used to process the database service in accordance with the licensors terms
of service and/or privacy policy.
If any student chooses not to agree to the database licensors terms of service or privacy policy,
the student will not be able to access and use the database. In these circumstances students
should contact their lecturer to enquire about alternative arrangements that are available.

Tutorial Seminar Registration
Tutorial signup for this course will be done via the Wattle website. Detailed information about
signup times will be provided on Wattle or during your first lecture. When tutorials are available for
enrolment, follow these steps:
1. Log on to Wattle, and go to the course site
2. Click on the link ‘Tutorial enrolment’
3. On the right of the screen, click on the tab ‘Become Member of . . . .’ for the tutorial class you
wish to enter
4. Confirm your choice
If you need to change your enrolment, you will be able to do so by clicking on the tab ‘Leave
group. . . .’ and then re-enrol in another group. You will not be able to enrol in groups that have
reached their maximum number. Please note that enrolment in ISIS must be finalised for you to
have access to Wattle.

SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is available
online from http : //students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/

