EMET3008/4310/8010

Applied Macro and Financial Econometrics
This course will examine modern applied research on macroeconomic and financial issues. The
main objective is to allow students to understand and critically appraise applied work on
macroeconomic and financial topics.

Mode of Delivery
Prerequisites
Incompatible Courses
Course Convener:
Phone:
Email:
Office hours for student
consultation:
Research Interests
Relevant administrator if
any (optional)
Phone:
Email:
Office hours for student
consultation:
Tutor (optional)

On campus
As listed in Programs and Courses
As listed in Programs and Courses
Sriram Shankar
6125 2310
sriram.shankar@anu.edu.au
Please refer to Wattle for consultation time

Risk and Uncertainty and Applied Econometrics
Nicole Millar
6125 0384
Enquiries.rse@anu.edu
TBA
-

SEMESTER 2
2017

http://programsandcourses.anu.edu.au/course/EMET3008

1 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

COURSE OVERVIEW
Learning Outcomes
This course will expose the student to a range of macroeconomics and finance research
techniques. Upon successful completion of the requirements for this course, students will be able
to:
•
•
•
•

Select a model and combine from a model space comprising univariate or multivariate;
Apply and explain the principles of parsimony and fit;
Explain the methodology of dynamic time series modelling
Critically evaluate the results derived from model estimation using econometric computer
software;
• Reconcile theory and evidence; and,
• Conduct hypothesis and diagnostic testing.

Assessment Summary
Assessment Task
1. Assignment 1
2. Assignment 2
3. Mid-term exam
4. Final exam

Value
15%
15%
30%
40%

Start Date
26/07/2017
06/09/2017
-

Due Date
25/08/2017
20/10/2017
18/09/2017
TBA

Feedback
Staff Feedback
Students will be given feedback in the following forms in this course: written comments, verbal
comments, feedback to the whole class and to tutorial groups.

Student Feedback
ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks feedback
from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is through Student
Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in these surveys is
anonymous and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee and Academic Board with
opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on ANU
courses, go to
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/

Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure
that staff and students are aware of the University’s academic standards, and implement
them. You can find the University’s education policies and an explanatory glossary at:
http://policies.anu.edu.au/
Students are expected to have read the Academic Misconduct Rules 2014 before the
commencement of their course.
Other key policies include:
• Student Assessment (Coursework)
• Student Surveys and Evaluations
2 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Required Resources
Commonwealth supported students and domestic full-fee paying students generally must
be able to complete the requirements of their program of study without the imposition of
fees that are additional to the student contribution amount or tuition fees.
Provided that its payment is in accordance with the Act, a fee is of a kind that is into any one or
more of the following categories:
(a) It is a charge for a good or service that is not essential to the course of study.
(b) It is a charge for an alternative form, or alternative forms, of access to a good or service that is
an essential component of the course of study but is otherwise made readily available at no
additional fee by the higher education provider.
(c) It is a charge for an essential good or service that the student has the choice of acquiring from a
supplier other than the higher education provider and is for:
(i) equipment or items which become the physical property of the student and are not consumed
during the course of study; or
(ii) food, transport and accommodation costs associated with the provision of field trips that form
part of the course of study.
(d) It is a fine or a penalty provided it is imposed principally as a disincentive and not in order to
raise revenue or cover administrative costs.

Additional course costs
EViews econometric software will be used in this course. A Student version of the software may be
purchased separately.
Examination material or equipment
The relevant information will be posted on Wattle.
Recommended Resources
Essential Textbook: Enders, W. Applied Econometric Time Series, Wiley, 2014.
Other recommended texts (not compulsory):
• Brooks, C., Introductory Econometrics for Finance, Cambridge, 2004.
• Hamilton, J. D., Time Series Analysis, Princeton, 1994.
• Harris, R. and R. Sollis, Applied Time Series Modelling and Forecasting, Wiley, 2003.
• Hendry, D.F., Dynamic econometrics, Oxford University Press, 1995.
• Lütkepohl, H. and M. Krätzig, Applied Time Series Econometrics, Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
• Mills, T.C., The Econometric Modelling of Financial Time Series, 2nd edition, Cambridge
University Press, 2000.
• Patterson, K., An Introduction to Applied Econometrics: A Time Series Approach,
MacMillan, 2000.
• Stock, J. & M. Watson, Introductory Econometrics, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
• Tsay, R.S., Analysis of Financial Time Series, Wiley, 2002.
• Verbeek, M., A Guide to Modern Econometrics, Wiley, 2008.
• Wooldridge, J., Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 2nd Ed. South-Western
College Publishing, 2001

3 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

COURSE SCHEDULE
Week/
Session
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 (Monday)
7 (Tuesday)
8

Summary of Activities
Univariate time series (Enders, chapter 1 and 2)
Stationary ARMA models (Enders, chapter 2)
Trend and difference stationary processes (Enders, chapter 4)
Testing for unit roots – I (Enders, chapter 4)
Testing for unit roots – II (Enders, chapter 4)
Modelling volatility – I (Enders, chapter 3).
Mid-semester exam
Modelling volatility – II (Enders, chapter 3).
VAR models - I (Enders, chapter 5)

9
10

VAR models - I (Enders, chapter 5)
VAR models - II (Enders, chapter 5)

11
12

Conitegration, long-run equilibria, error correction models – I (Enders, chapter 6)
Conitegration, long-run equilibria, error correction models – II (Enders, chapter 6)
Examination period

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS

The ANU is using Turnitin to enhance student citation and referencing techniques, and to
assess assignment submissions as a component of the University's approach to managing
Academic Integrity. For additional information regarding Turnitin please visit the ANU
Online website.
Students may choose not to submit assessment items through Turnitin. In this instance
you will be required to submit, alongside the assessment item itself, copies of all
references included in the assessment item.
As a further academic integrity control, students may be selected for a 15 minute individual
oral examination of their written assessment submissions.
Any student identified, either during the current semester or in retrospect, as having used
ghost writing services will be investigated under the University’s Academic Misconduct
Rule.
Assessment Tasks
The assignments and exams for honours and graduate students will be longer and more
challenging compared to undergraduate students.
Assignments
There will be two assignments in this course. The due dates for these assignments will be posted
on Wattle.
Examination(s)
The mid-semester exam would contain short-answer/calculation type questions based on topics
covered in the assignment and textbook. Students who miss the mid-semester exam for valid and
documented medical reasons will have the value of the mid-semester exam added to the value of
4 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

the final examination. In other words, students who miss the mid-term exam for valid medical reasons
will have 70% of the assessment based on the final examination.
Assignment submission

Online Submission: Assignments are submitted using Turnitin in the course Wattle site.
You will be required to electronically sign a declaration as part of the submission of your
assignment. Please keep a copy of the assignment for your records.
Extensions and penalties
Extensions and late submission of assessment pieces are covered by the Student Assessment
(Coursework) Policy and Procedure.
The Course Convener may grant extensions for assessment pieces that are not examinations or takehome examinations. If you need an extension, you must request it in writing on or before the due date. If
you have documented and appropriate medical evidence that demonstrates you were not able to request
an extension on or before the due date, you may be able to request it after the due date.
No submission of assessment tasks without an extension after the due date will be permitted. If an
assessment task is not submitted by the due date, a mark of 0 will be awarded.
Returning assignments
The dates for returning the assignments will be posted on Wattle.
Announcements
Students are expected to check the Wattle site for announcements about this course, e.g. changes
to timetables or notifications of cancellations.

Scaling
Your final mark for the course will be based on the raw marks allocated for each of your
assessment items. However, your final mark may not be the same number as produced by
that formula, as marks may be scaled. Any scaling applied will preserve the rank order of
raw marks (i.e. if your raw mark exceeds that of another student, then your scaled mark
will exceed the scaled mark of that student), and may be either up or down.
Privacy Notice
The ANU has made a number of third party, online, databases available for students to
use. Use of each online database is conditional on student end users first agreeing to the
database licensor’s terms of service and/or privacy policy. Students should read these
carefully.
In some cases student end users will be required to register an account with the database
licensor and submit personal information, including their: first name; last name; ANU email
address; and other information.
In cases where student end users are asked to submit ‘content’ to a database, such as an
assignment or short answers, the database licensor may only use the student’s ‘content’ in
accordance with the terms of service – including any (copyright) licence the student grants
to the database licensor.
Any personal information or content a student submits may be stored by the licensor,
potentially offshore, and will be used to process the database service in accordance with
the licensors terms of service and/or privacy policy.
If any student chooses not to agree to the database licensor’s terms of service or privacy
policy, the student will not be able to access and use the database. In these
5 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

circumstances students should contact their lecturer to enquire about alternative
arrangements that are available.
Tutorial Seminar Registration
Tutorial signup for this course will be done via the Wattle website. Detailed information
about signup times will be provided on Wattle or during your first lecture. When tutorials
are available for enrolment, follow these steps:
1. Log on to Wattle, and go to the course site
2. Click on the link “Tutorial enrolment”
3. On the right of the screen, click on the tab “Become Member of…..” for the tutorial
class you wish to enter
4. Confirm your choice
If you need to change your enrolment, you will be able to do so by clicking on the tab
“Leave group….” and then re-enrol in another group. You will not be able to enrol in
groups that have reached their maximum number. Please note that enrolment in ISIS
must be finalised for you to have access to Wattle.
SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is
available online from http://students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/

6 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

