ECON 2102
MACROECONOMICS 2
This course introduces the student to methods and issues in contemporary macroeconomics. A good
understanding of the various macroeconomic issues and models is vital for any student of economics,
business and finance. A central theme is the inter-relationship between empirical macroeconomic
outcomes and theoretical constructs for explaining or understanding these outcomes. These models
can also be used to understand and re-invent macroeconomic policies. In this course we also aim to
bring the themes in undergraduate macroeconomic studies closer to what is taught in graduate
courses, and also closer to how macroeconomics is done in the best universities and policy institutions
such as the U.S. Federal Reserve, the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, Bank
of England, the Reserve Banks of New Zealand and Australia.
Mode of Delivery
Prerequisites

On campus

Course Convener:

Dr. Chung Tran

Phone:
Email:
Office hours for student
consultation:
Research Interests
Course Administrator
Phone:
Email:
Lecturer
Phone:
Email:
Office hours for student
consultation:
Head Tutor

+61 2 6125 5638
ECON.2102.ANU@gmail.com
Mon 12:00-13:00

ECON1101 Microeconomics 1 and ECON1102
Macroeconomics 1 or ECON1100 Economics 1 (H), or
ECON1001/1011 Economics I (P or H)

Macroeconomic Policy, Taxation, Social Insurance
Nicole Millar
6125 0384
Enquiries.rse@anu.edu
Dr. Chung Tran
+61 2 6125 5638
ECON.2102.ANU@gmail.com
Mon 12:00-13:00
Sebatian Wende
sebastianwtwende@gmail.com

SEMESTER 2 - 2017

1 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Description
Macroeconomics deals with the structure and performance of whole economies. In this course we
will describe and analyse the factors that influence aggregate economic outcomes such as growth
in national output and income, unemployment and inflation. Throughout the course, we will
develop several micro-founded macroeconomic models, and consider alternative theories and
their competing conclusions about the nature of market economies and the role of government
policies to influence macroeconomic outcomes. The theories will be applied to current issues such
as financial crisis, fiscal stress, debt crisis, tax reforms and job creation.
Learning Outcomes
On completion of the course, students should be able to:
1. Possess a coherent set of ideas for understanding macroeconomic phenomena and policy
issues
2. Understand the assumptions, structure and micro-foundations of a macroeconomic model
and understand its power and shortcomings
3. Formulate a relevant model and use such analytical tools in addressing a key
macroeconomic question independently
4. Understand the different ways in which economic issues can be tackled
Assessment Summary
Activities
Tutorials
In-tutorial test 1
Mid-semester
examination
In-tutorial test 2
End-of-semester
examination

Weighting (%)
2%
4%
35%

Time
Weekly
Week 4
Week 6

Topics Covered
Weekly
Week 1
Weeks 2-6

4%
55%

Week 10
Exam period

Weeks 7-8
Weeks 7-12

Research-Led Teaching
This course will expose students to the frontier research and cutting-edge modelling tools in
contemporary macroeconomics. It will cover all pressing macroeconomic issues Australia faces
now and years to come.
Feedback
Staff Feedback
Students will be given feedback in the following forms in this course






Weekly tutorial activities to develop student learning
Online discussion and Q&A
Weekly office hours for student consultation
Two in-tutorial tests to assess student progress
In-class reviews

Student Feedback

2 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks feedback
from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is through Student
Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in these surveys is anonymous
and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee and Academic Board with
opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on ANU
courses, go to
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/
Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure that staff
and students are aware of the University’s academic standards, and implement them. You can find
the University’s education policies and an explanatory glossary at: http://policies.anu.edu.au/
Students are expected to have read the Student Academic Integrity Policy before the
commencement of their course. Other key policies include:
 Student Assessment (Coursework)
 Student Surveys and Evaluations
Recommended Resources



Lecture notes and discussion slides
Stephen D. Williamson (2014), “Macroeconomics”, 5th edition. Pearson Addison Wesley Publishers
(International version)

COURSE SCHEDULE
Week/
Session
1

Summary of Activities

Assessment

Introduction and Review

Test 1

2
3
4
5
6

Economic Growth: Facts and Theory
Economic Growth: Policy Analysis
Household and Firm and Government
One Period Model and Application
Consumption, Saving and Investment Decisions
Mid Semester
Two Period Model
A Dynamic Macro Model: Introduction and Application
Fiscal Policy and Ricardian Equivalence Theorem

Mid-semester
Mid-semester
Mid-semester
Mid-semester

Real Business Cycle Model: Introduction and Application
Stabilisation Policy
New Keynessian Model: Monetary Policy
Examination period

Final exam
Final exam
Final exam

7
8
9
10
11
12

3 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Test 2
Final exam
Final exam

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
The ANU is using Turnitin to enhance student citation and referencing techniques, and to assess
assignment submissions as a component of the University's approach to managing Academic
Integrity. For additional information regarding Turnitin please visit the ANU Online website.
Students may choose not to submit assessment items through Turnitin. In this instance you will be
required to submit, alongside the assessment item itself, copies of all references included in the
assessment item.
As a further academic integrity control, students may be selected for a 15 minute individual oral
examination of their written assessment submissions.
Any student identified, either during the current semester or in retrospect, as having used ghost
writing services will be investigated under the University’s Academic Misconduct Rule.
Assessment Tasks


Tutorial questions and participation: For most weeks, there will be a tutorial session.
Tutorial questions will be available on the class website. The suggested answers for the
tutorial questions will be posted a week after. Students MUST attend the tutorial section
that they are enrolled in.



In-tutorial tests: Two times during the session, your progress will be assessed during your
tutorial classes. The assessment will take a form of a 50 minutes long test. The tests will be
administered during weeks 4 and 10. Students must sit the tutorial tests in the tutorial
group to which they have been allocated. There will be NO supplementary tests offered
for the in-tutorial tests. You should make every effort to take the in-tutorial test(s).
Students who miss the in-tutorial test will be able to count the final exam for bigger
weighting of the total class mark.



The Mid-semester: The mid-semester will be held on the University. The exact dates for
each course will be announced by the University. No supplementary exam will be given
for any reason. Students who miss the mid-term will be able to count the final exam for
bigger weighting of the total class mark.



Final Exam: The final exam will be held on the University. The exact dates for each course
will be announced by the University.

Course Learning
Outcomes
Learning Outcome 1
Learning Outcome 2
Learning Outcome 3
Learning Outcome 4

Homework

Mid-term

Examination

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Scaling

4 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Your final mark for the course will be based on the raw marks allocated for each of your
assessment items. However, your final mark may not be the same number as produced by that
formula, as marks may be scaled. Any scaling applied will preserve the rank order of raw marks
(i.e. if your raw mark exceeds that of another student, then your scaled mark will exceed the
scaled mark of that student), and may be either up or down.
Privacy Notice
The ANU has made a number of third party, online, databases available for students to use. Use of
each online database is conditional on student end users first agreeing to the database licensor’s
terms of service and/or privacy policy. Students should read these carefully.
In some cases student end users will be required to register an account with the database licensor
and submit personal information, including their: first name; last name; ANU email address; and
other information.
In cases where student end users are asked to submit ‘content’ to a database, such as an
assignment or short answers, the database licensor may only use the student’s ‘content’ in
accordance with the terms of service – including any (copyright) licence the student grants to the
database licensor.
Any personal information or content a student submits may be stored by the licensor, potentially
offshore, and will be used to process the database service in accordance with the licensors terms
of service and/or privacy policy.
If any student chooses not to agree to the database licensor’s terms of service or privacy policy,
the student will not be able to access and use the database. In these circumstances students
should contact their lecturer to enquire about alternative arrangements that are available.
Tutorial Seminar Registration
Tutorial signup for this course will be done via the Wattle website. Detailed information about
signup times will be provided on Wattle or during your first lecture. When tutorials are available
for enrolment, follow these steps:
1. Log on to Wattle, and go to the course site
2. Click on the link “Tutorial enrolment”
3. On the right of the screen, click on the tab “Become Member of….” for the tutorial class
you wish to enter
4. Confirm your choice
If you need to change your enrolment, you will be able to do so by clicking on the tab “Leave
group….” and then re-enrol in another group. You will not be able to enrol in groups that have
reached their maximum number. Please note that enrolment in ISIS must be finalised for you to
have access to Wattle.

SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is available
online from http://students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/

5 | THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY

