ECON1102

Macroeconomics 1
Macroeconomics is concerned with the operation of the economy as a whole, with
attention paid to such things as unemployment, inflation, and interest rates,
determination of the level of national income, savings and investment, and the
exchange rate and the current account of the balance of payments. The course
develops a consistent model of the economy to explore the interactions of key
macroeconomic markets and variables and to examine the impacts of different
kinds of shocks to the economy and the role of government budgetary and
monetary policy in influencing the level of economic activity.
Mode of Delivery
Prerequisites

On campus, lecture and tutorial based
Completion of, or concurrent enrollment in, Econ 1101 –
Microeconomics 1
Incompatible Courses As listed in Programs and Courses
Course Convener and Dr. Cameron Gordon
Lecturer
Phone
(02) 61250384
Email
cameron.gordon@anu.edu.au
Office hours for student This information will be available in Wattle
consultation
Room 2010, HW Arndt Building 25a
Research Interests
Public Economics, Political Economy, Transport Economics,
Economic History, Infrastructure Finance
Relevant administrator Nicole Millar / School Office
Phone
(02) 61250384
Email
enquiries.rse@anu.edu.au
Tutor
This information will be available in Wattle

SEMESTER 2
2017

http://programsandcourses.anu.edu.au/course/ECON1102 and Wattle

ECON 1102 - SEMESTER 2 2017- AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 1 of 7

COURSE OVERVIEW
Course Description
This is a class about macro-economics; that is, the economy as a whole. It differs from microeconomics which focuses on components of the economy. And it also differs from microeconomics in assuming that the whole of an economy may not always behave like the sum of the
parts, especially in the short-run. Key macroeconomic policy and economic questions and ideas
we will cover include: National Income Accounting; economic productivity and growth across a
national or regional economy; management of the business cycle through fiscal and monetary
policy tools; Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply models; and tools to measure and
monitor a macro-economy. This course will take an economic history approach, starting by looking
at the Great Depression of the 1930s (which rightfully can be said to have given birth to the field)
and going on to other key historical episodes up to the present day as illustrations of
macroeconomics in practice. We will also examine the way macroeconomic thought has evolved,
especially in response to real-world events. Macroeconomics is very much a field in which failure
of models in the field often leads to rather quick re-thinking and re-formulation of ideas.

Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of the requirements for this course, students should be able to:
• Understand the differences and relationship between macroeconomic theory and
microeconomic theory.
• Describe the main policy instruments used to mitigate and manage business cycles,
especially recession and boom.
• Explain the limitations of government macro-intervention and the differences between
monetary and fiscal policy, as well as how they are best used together .
• Understand and use basic macro-economy models, especially aggregate supply and
demand frameworks
• Understand the relationship between the real and financial sectors of the
economy especially as they pertain to business cycles.
 Understand and use basic macro-economy models, especially aggregate supply and
demand frameworks
 Be able to analyse the dynamics and trade-offs between price inflation and unemployment.

Assessment Summary
The table below contains the proposed assessment schedule. Details about assessment may
change during the first two weeks of semester. If there are any changes to the assessment
schedule these will be posted in Wattle.
Assessment
item
Tutorial
Preparation

Mid-semester
exam
Final
examination

Description

Specific
requirements

Due date

Compulsory and
non-redeemable

Weekly – starting
week 2.

90 minutes with 15
minutes reading time

Optional and
redeemable

180 minutes with
30 minutes reading
time

Compulsory and
non-redeemable

Week 6 (check
note on
examinations)
Final
examination
period

Pre-prepared, hand
written tutorial
solutions for
selected questions.

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 2 of 7

Weighting (%)
10%

30%

60% or 90%

Research-Led Teaching
The course will cover recent research in the area of macroeconomics. Recent papers on fiscal and
monetary policy, inflation and unemployment, among other topics, will be provided in Wattle, often
as suggested optional readings. When feasible the main findings of those papers will be discussed
in class. The lecturer in charge of this course has research interests in economic history, public
economics, political economy, and financial crisis as well as transport and infrastructure economics
and has published papers in top international journals.

Workload
Students taking this course are expected to commit at least 11 hours a week to completing the
work. This will include:
• 3 hours a week: lecture
• 1 hour a week: tutorial
• At least 7 hours a week: reading, research, writing, lecture and tutorial preparation

Course delivery
The Pass component of Macroconomics 1 (ECON1102) consists on three hours of lecture and a
one-hour tutorial per week (see the timetable for details on dates, times and locations). Tutorial
meetings start in week 2 (See tutorial registration details below).
• Lectures: It is expected that students attend lectures whenever possible and come prepared to
them. The handouts for each topic (primarily PPTs) will be available before the lectures in
Wattle. The relevant references are included in the last page.
• Tutorials. It is expected that students prepare for tutorials in advance and come ready to
answer questions about the problems assigned for each week's tutorial. The details about
tutors are available in the contacts section and more detailed information about tutorials can be
found in the folder “Tutors and tutorials” in Wattle.

Co-teaching
Please contact the administrative office for further guidance.

Attendance requirements
There are no marks allocated for attendance but participation in lectures and tutorials is
encouraged. As noted above it is expected that students prepare for lectures and tutorials in
advance.

Tutorial registration
Enrolment in tutorials will be completed online using the Electronic Teaching Assistant (ETA)
after the first lecture. More information will be available in Wattle.

Prescribed text and reference materials
Prescribed text
Macroeconomics VitalSource (3e)
Glenn Hubbard, Anne Garnett, Philip Lewis, Tony O'Brien
ISBN 9781486011735
ISBN 10 148601173X
Published 02/12/2014
Published by Pearson Australia
(Hereafter referred to as ‘H’)
This book can be obtained through the ANU Bookstore or through the ANU Library
Other materials, available online, will also be prescribed to supplement the text on certain topics.
These links will be provided on the Wattle site in advance of the relevant lectures.

Recommended (non-prescribed texts)
Bernanke B., et. al. (2011). Principles of Macroeconomics, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill
Colander, D (2009). Macroeconomics (8th edition), McGraw-Hill
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 3 of 7

COURSE SCHEDULE
The table below contains the proposed course schedule. Required readings are indicated by an
asterisk (*) and are listed first. They mostly refer to the prescribed text. However a number of
different sources are sometimes used. The complete set of references will appear in the last page
of each handout. Please check the last page of the handouts, as they become available, as
additional references might be added throughout the semester.
Topic

Title

References

1

Macroeconomics v microeconomics

H Chs. 1, 2, 3

2

Readings (online) to be assigned

3

The Great Depression and the birth
of macroeconomics
National Income Accounting

H Ch. 4

4

Economic growth

H, Ch 5,6

5

Labour Markets and Unemployment

H, Ch 7

6

Price Inflation

H, Ch 8

7

The short-run model of the
macroeconomy

H, Ch 9

8

Aggregate Supply and Aggregate
Demand analysis

H, Ch 10
(except
appendix)

9

Different Schools of Macroeconomic
Thought

H, Ch 10 appendix
And other materials to be assigned.

10

Monetary Policy

H, Ch 11, 12

11

Fiscal Policy

H, Ch 13

12

Open Economy Macroeconomics

H, Ch 14

ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
Tutorial Assessment
The tutorial assessment consists of submitting pre-prepared tutorial solutions for selected tutorial
questions. These questions will involve a combination of problem-solving questions and short
essays, very similar to questions that can be found in examination papers. The purpose of this
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 4 of 7

assessment is to provide regular feedback on how to answer questions. Students will be advised
at a later date, in class and in Wattle, of the precise tasks to be fulfilled for each tutorial.
•
•

Hard Copy Submission (handwritten only): Pre-prepared tutorial solutions must be submitted
to the tutor before commencing the tutorial. Email and fax submissions are not acceptable.
Please keep a copy of your tutorial solutions for your own use during class discussions.
The tutorial questions will be returned during the tutorials or lectures as soon as they are
marked. One exception will be the final tutorial. Since there are no classes in week 13,
alternative arrangements will be made and details will be posted on Wattle.

Extensions and penalties
• Extensions and late submission of assessment pieces are covered by the Student Assessment
(Coursework) Policy and Procedure.
• The Course Convener may grant extensions for assessment pieces that are not examinations or
take- home examinations. If you need an extension, you must request it in writing on or before
the due date. If you have documented and appropriate medical evidence that demonstrates you
were not able to request an extension on or before the due date, you may be able to request it
after the due date.
• No submission of assessment tasks without an extension after the due date will be permitted.
If an assessment task is not submitted by the due date, a mark of 0 will be awarded.

Examinations
•

•

•

The mid-semester exam will consist of 2 sections – multiple choice and short-answer - to
be answered in 90 minutes and will take place in week 6. Students will be advised at a later
date, in class and in Wattle, of the material covered in the mid-semester exam. Note that for
reasons beyond the control of the lecturer (e.g. clashes with other mid-semester exams) the
mid-semester exam may be scheduled outside the preferred week (week 6). Any changes to
the schedule will be notified in class and in Wattle. Students are expected to check the Wattle
site regularly for announcements.
The final exam will consist of 3 sections – multiple choice, short answer and long answer - to
be answered in 3 hours. The questions will vary in complexity with 50% of the exam devoted to
basic questions, aimed at determining whether the student should pass the unit, and then
questions of increasing complexity, aimed at determining which students deserve credit,
distinction or high distinction. You may have access to the previous years’ final exam papers
through Wattle. The final exam will assess all material covered in the course.
The permitted materials at the examinations are non-scientific calculators. You will also be able
to check the permitted materials at the examination at http://timetable.anu.edu.au/exams/
when the examination date and location will be announced.

OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION
Announcements
Students are expected to check the Wattle site for announcements about this course, e.g. changes
to timetables or notifications of cancellations. Notifications of emergency cancellations of lectures
or tutorials will be posted on the door of the relevant room.

Feedback
Staff Feedback
Students will be given feedback in the following forms in this course:
• The solutions to tutorial assessments and mid-semester exams will be covered
in class.
• Written comments, if relevant, will be included in the tutorial assessments returned to
students.
• Verbal comments, if necessary, will be provided during consultation time.

Student Feedback
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 5 of 7

ANU is committed to the demonstration of educational excellence and regularly seeks feedback
from students. One of the key formal ways students have to provide feedback is through Student
Experience of Learning Support (SELS) surveys. The feedback given in these surveys is
anonymous and provides the Colleges, University Education Committee and Academic Board with
opportunities to recognise excellent teaching, and opportunities for improvement.
For more information on student surveys at ANU and reports on the feedback provided on ANU
courses, go to
• http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/students/ and
• http://unistats.anu.edu.au/surveys/selt/results/learning/

Policies
ANU has educational policies, procedures and guidelines, which are designed to ensure that staff
and students are aware of the University’s academic standards, and implement them. You can find
the University’s education policies and an explanatory glossary at: http://policies.anu.edu.au/
Students are expected to have read the Student Academic Integrity Policy before the
commencement of their course.

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 6 of 7

Other key policies include:
• Student Assessment (Coursework)
• Student Surveys and Evaluations

SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
The University offers a number of support services for students. Information on these is available
online from http://students.anu.edu.au/studentlife/

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY – Page 7 of 7

