Economics 002
Introductory Economics: Macroeconomics
FALL 2017

Department of Economics -University of Pennsylvania-

Instructor information

Professor:
Luca Bossi, Ph.D.
Office:
547-McNeil Building.
E-mail:
boluca@upenn.edu (best way to contact).
I check my email regularly during working hours. However, if your email implies a very long answer,
please come and see me during office hours. I am typically also available in the classroom right
before/after the lectures.
Phone:
215-898-7779
Office hours:
TBA, or by appointment.

Course information
Meeting time/place: Monday and Wednesday 12-1pm (if you are enrolled in Econ 002-001) or 1-2pm
(if you are in Econ 002-002), in STIT B21. You must also attend the recitation for
which you are enrolled in on Thursday/Friday.
Course website(s): 1) Login in Canvas system at www.library.upenn.edu/courseware
2) Signup to Mindtap/Cengage (from within Canvas), a companion website to
complete the online assignments and access the online copy of the textbook.
You MUST sign up using your Penn student ID. Failure to do so, will lead to a
loss of 1 point from your overall score. More details and “how to signup” are
available in a separate document posted on Canvas.
Optional: you can follow me on Twitter @Econ2Penn if you would like.
You can also network with me on Linkedin.
Prerequisites:
The official prerequisite for this course is Econ 001. There are no exceptions to
this Departmental requirement.

Course overview and objectives
ECON 002 is the first course in macroeconomics for undergraduate students. Macroeconomics
studies the aggregate behavior of the economy. In the first part of the course, students will learn how
to measure economic performance and the meaning of terms such as GDP, unemployment, and
inflation. The main focus of this course will subsequently be the models that attempt to explain the
determination of national output. We will examine the long-run growth of national income as well as
the short-run fluctuations in national income (i.e., recessions and booms). Throughout the course we
will explore how government policies can influence the performance of the economy.
This course fulfills one Curriculum requirement for the Society Sector in the College of A&S
(http://www.college.upenn.edu/node/2507). Hence, this course should enable students to bring a
range of normative frameworks or theories to bear on existing cultural, legal, political, or social
practices.

Page 1 of 5

Textbook (and Companion Website)

N. Gregory Mankiw: “Principles of Macroeconomics”, Cengage, 8th edition.
You can opt to have an electronic copy of the book with your Mindtap subscription. This is a cheaper
option than buying the hardcopy of the textbook and the access to Mindtap separately.

Course Structure
You should attend both lectures and recitations, as the material covered will be different in each.
Assignments and tests will cover all material covered in the lectures as well as the recitations. All the
recitation sessions for this course with their locations and instructors are listed in the course
registrar's website: http://www.upenn.edu/registrar/roster/econ.html

Requirements and grading distribution/criteria
Your grade in this course is based on attainment. This means that if you demonstrate a high degree of
competence with the material, you will receive a high grade regardless of your relative rank in the
class. You can use the following grading scale to convert your test/assignment scores into letter
grades:
A: > 93
B: 83.5 - 86.99
C: 73.5-76.99
D: 62.5-66.99
A-: 90-92.99
B-: 80 - 83.49
C-: 70-73.49
D-: 60-62.49
B+: 87-89.99
C+: 77-79.99
D+: 67-69.99
F: < 60
Your overall grade will be based on two exams, the final exam, and the assignments. Failure to attend
class/recitations may impact your letter grade as well.
There are two methods used to calculate the course grade; I will choose the method that gives you
the higher letter grade.
Method 1: 35% for the final exam, 20% for assignments, and 20% or 25% for your two exams.
Method 2: 30% for the final exam, 25% for assignments, and 20% or 25% for your two exams.
Your worse (regular, not final) exam score will always count for 20% of your letter grade. Your best
(regular, not final) exam score will always count for 25% of your letter grade. These two methods
favor the students and it will help mitigate the effects of a one-time poor performance.

Exams
In this course there are no re-take exams. Only regularly scheduled exams and makeup exams.
When you take an exam the grade in that exam will count toward your letter grade for this course.
Exams are designed to evaluate mastery of course material. There will be two exams administered
during the evening on dates/locations selected by the university. I will announce the locations and
logistical details for the regular and makeup exams in class and on the Canvas system.
Date, Time (All locations of the exams are TBA)
Exam 1
Exam 1 make-up

Friday September 29 from 6-7pm
Monday October 02 from 6-7pm

Exam 2
Exam 2 make-up

Friday November 03 from 6-7pm
Monday November 06 from 6-7pm
Page 2 of 5

Final exam
Final make-up

Wednesday December 20 from 3-5pm
TBA sometimes in January from 6-8pm

The final exam is cumulative. There are official Provost’s rules governing the final exams. Please read
about those in Canvas. There are also official rules for what constitutes a legitimate reason for
missing an exam and ask for a make-up. Please read about those in the Department of Economics
Course Policies. If you do not show up for the final exam and you do not have one of those
legitimate reasons to miss the exam, you will get a D in this course.
http://economics.sas.upenn.edu/undergraduate-program/course-information/guidelines/policies
Students are responsible for making sure, at the beginning of the term, that they can attend the
regular exams. Registering for this course means that you certify that you will be present for the
exams (unless one of the explicitly stated exceptions in the Department of Economics Course Policies
arises). If a student has a legitimate conflict with the scheduled exam time, the student must make
myself and his or her recitation instructor (TA) aware of the source of that conflict by email at least 3
days prior to the exam date. You will then be placed on the official make-up list for that exam. There
is only one make-up exam date offered for each exam. Students may request to take a make-up
exam only once in the course of the entire semester.

Re-grading policies

Errors in grading rarely occur; here are the rules and procedures for requesting a correction. The
important general rule is that such a request should clearly and succinctly state the unambiguous
error you believe has occurred. Errors in grading arising from illegible or garbled answers are not
subject to correction. Students who believe their work has been graded incorrectly should petition
for a correction in typing to the Professor. Students should not approach either the Professor or the
TA with an oral request before making their written request. Requests should be focused on the
specific error and should be made within a week of the work being returned. Requests for regrading of the final exam or make-up final exam must be made within the first 3 weeks of the
following semester. You can ask for re-grading only if you wrote in pen on your exams. No
possibility of re-grading for those students who decide to use a pencil instead. Re-grading is not
allowed for the multiple choice part of the exams.
The entire graded examination should be resubmitted; there is no guarantee that grades will rise as,
statistically, positive and negative errors in grading are equally likely. If the request arises because
you think different students have been graded differently, all the affected students should submit
their work as a group.

Assignments
Homework assignments are designed as learning processes. In particular, the assignments in this
course are related to textbook reading and comprehension. There will be a number of assignments,
and it is required that you complete them. They count for 20% or 25% of your letter grade
depending on the method used to compute your letter grade (see above). Assignments will be
posted on the Mindtap website (mostly) or on Canvas web site. You will be notified about their
availability and about their due dates within Canvas. Once you submit your answer, either the
Mindtap web site or your TA will provide an answer to the questions posted and an explanation as to
what you did incorrectly (if anything). You might consider printing the answers from the Mindtap web
Page 3 of 5

site for your own perusal. If you have any issues with how your problem set was graded, you should
see me.
No late assignments will be accepted. You will receive a zero if you do not submit an assignment at
the deadline. Mindtap system will have strict deadlines embedded, and if you miss it there isn’t
anything that can be done. Please do plan ahead. “My laptop died”, “my alarm clock didn’t work” are
not Penn-compatible excuses. Technical problems with your computer or your internet connection
are not acceptable excuses either. You have several days to submit the homework, do not leave
submission to the last hour of the last day that it is due.
I will drop the lowest assignment score. So if you miss an assignment for whatever reason, that
counts as your lowest score and your letter grade will not be impacted. If you miss more than one
assignment, that will likely impact your letter grade.
Assignments in Mindtap are graded at Deadline. This option gives the student one attempt at each
question. They can save their work and come back and change answers at any time up until the due
date and time of the assignment. They do not receive any feedback for the questions/assignment
until after the deadline is past. Feel free to study with other students and to discuss the assignments
with your classmates and in fact you are encouraged to do so. However, the work you turn in should
be your own. This is because working out problems is an essential component to learning economics.
In addition to counting directly for part of your grade, your performance on the exams is likely to be
correlated with your performance on assignments. Directly copying someone else’s problem set will
be considered cheating.

Honor Code and Academic Integrity
Please familiarize yourself with the code of academic integrity at the University of Pennsylvania. You
can find it here: www.upenn.edu/academicintegrity/
In particular, students are expected and required to:
1. Do not misrepresent work that you did not complete as your own.
2. Do not cheat in examinations, as doing so will result in sanctions.
3. No graphing calculators are allowed during exams, only scientific calculators. No books, or notes
are permitted during the exams too. Nothing that connects to the Internet is allowed either.
If I catch you cheating during any of the course activities, I reserve the right to automatically give you
a grade of D or below (at my discretion) for this course. Also I will report you to the appropriate
university office and follow standard university procedures.

Additional important issues
- Important dates: Mindtap grace period expires 14 days from the first day the student signups for it;
October 09, drop period ends; November 10, last day to withdraw from a course.
- Attendance and Course Absence Report: Students must attend classes/recitations regularly and
come to class prepared. Too many absences from class and/or recitations might affect your final
grade. According to College rules (http://www.college.upenn.edu/node/3998), any absences should
be reported through the Course Absence Report system. There are no “excused absences” – if you
miss class/recitations, you are responsible for making up any work and for knowing the material
covered. The purpose of the Course Absence Report system is to facilitate communication between
instructors and students when a student misses class. The system allows you (student) to inform me
(the instructor) about absences of five days or less. If the absence is more than five days, you (the
Page 4 of 5

student) should contact your home school advising office for assistance and to discuss the academic
implications of a longer absence. You can submit a Course Absence Report by logging on to Penn
InTouch and choosing the “Course Absence Report” option from the menu on the left.
Studying for this class really means practicing the techniques by solving problems, going to
class/recitations, and doing the readings. Furthermore, some material covered in class may not be
available in the textbook and you may be tested on it. Some questions in the exams can be
answered only if classes are attended. You are required to check the course website on Canvas and
Mindtap regularly. Most (but not all) of the class material including lecture notes, problem sets,
exercises, readings, etc. will be posted online. All the major announcements can also be found on
Canvas. This means that you need to check the course website at least a couple of times during each
week. I will assume that each student is aware of all the material posted on the Canvas. To get
exposed to the full class material you must come to class. Please make yourselves familiar with the
Canvas and Mindtap systems within the first few days of the semester if you have not used them
before. Finally, make absolutely sure you are registered for this class and can access the Canvas
system, so that you will receive my messages in case I send e-mails through the Canvas system.
- Drawback of late enrollment: If you sign up for the class late, and you miss any graded
assignment(s) as a result, those will count as zero. I will disregard one such assignments from your
letter grade score. However, if you miss more than one assignment, this will likely impact your letter
grade.
- Special needs/arrangements: Reasonable accommodation will be made for those with special
needs. Anyone eligible for special arrangements on examinations must make sure I get a notification
from the appropriate Penn office, ASAP. Please contact Student Disability Services (SDS) at the
Weingarten Learning Resource Center http://www.vpul.upenn.edu/lrc/sds/ and make sure all the
necessary administrative steps are taken in your case. You must also send an e-mail to me no later
than 5 days prior to the exam so that the necessary arrangements for assistance are made.
- Tutoring: If you need tutoring for this class, please check with the Tutoring Center.
www.vpul.upenn.edu/tutoring/index.php.
- Contacts:
• Logistical issues regarding joining a section or changing sections: Lynn Costello, the undergraduate
coordinator in the economics department. She can be found in McNeil room 160 or via email at
costello@sas.upenn.edu. Lynn is also knowledgeable about requirements for majors etcetera.
• Technical issues regarding Canvas go to: http://www.library.upenn.edu/courseware.
• Technical issues regarding the Mindtap site: go to support.cengage.com/
Concerns about homework, economics in general, or the material covered in class etc: contact either
me (or your TA). I am here to facilitate your academic success at Penn. If you contact me as soon as a
problem emerges, I will be able to help you better.

Comments and suggestions
If you have any comments or suggestions for me, please do not hesitate to stop by during my office
hours or to drop me an email.

Tentative Course outline and relative assigned readings/material will be posted
directly on Canvas
Page 5 of 5

