Economics 102: Macroeconomic Theory
Instructor: Guillermo Ordoñez.
Office: McNeil 428.
Phone: (215) 898-1875.
Email: ordonez@econ.upenn.edu.
Time of Class: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 1:30 pm - 2:50 pm.
Room: Stiteler B6
Office Hours: Tuesdays 10:00-11:30 am, and by appointment.
Teaching Assistants and Recitations:
Coby Wittman: Recitations: M 9-10am (TBD) and F 10am-11am (TBD).
Office Hours: TBD
Pedro Brandao Solti: Recitations: M 2-3pm (TBD) and F 9-10am (TBD).
Office Hours: TBD
Recommended Text: Stephen D. Williamson: Macroeconomics, 5th edition.

1

Course Outline and Overview

Economics 102 is the basic course in macroeconomic theory for undergraduate economics
majors. In contrast to the focus of Economics 2 on policy, Economics 102 is a mathematical
class and is centered on constructing and understanding macroeconomic models.
We will cover models at an abstract and advanced level. You MUST have the degree of
mathematical maturity associated with the concepts of sets, functions, derivatives, integrals,
Taylor series, optimization, ordinary differential equations, and other material covered in
Math 104 and Math 114/115. STRICT prerequisites for the class is Economics 1, 2, 101,
and one year of calculus. If you do not meet these requirements, you cannot take this class.
This course will be taught from an equilibrium perspective. This means we will
analyze environments in which economic agents optimize and in which aggregate consistency
conditions hold. Understanding the concept of equilibrium will then be the single most
important task of the course.
We will apply this equilibrium insight to discuss the theory of long-run economic growth
and short-run economic fluctuations. Growth theory describes and explains how the main
economic aggregates (such as output, employment, inflation, interest rates) evolve on average
over long periods of time, whereas theories of short-run fluctuations (business cycle theories)
analyze the short-run movements of economic aggregates. Once we have understood how
the macroeconomy works, we can start analyzing macroeconomic policy, in particular fiscal
policy (what are the macroeconomic effects of taxation, government spending, budget deficits,
or surpluses) and monetary policy (what happens if the Federal Reserve Bank increases or
lowers the Federal Funds Rate). By the end of the course you should be able to construct a
critical opinion about economic issues using good economic intuition and knowledge.

1

2

Readings

The most important material for this class is the set of slides, homeworks, practice
exercises and announcements I will post regularly on the Canvas web page for the class.
You should know how to use Canvas to access all that material. The Library provides tutorials
and help in case you are not familiar with this website.
Since I will discuss all the topics (growth, business cycles and macroeconomic policies)
in a unified framework, using a unified notation, I suggest to use my slides and classes as
the main tool to study. As a support material I will upload a set of notes that follow
notation and topics that are consistent with my classes. Even though there are no required
textbooks for this class, I will also match most covered topics with chapters of Stephen
Williamson’s Macroeconomics, 5th ed. While the notes and the textbook are not required
(meaning midterms will not include concepts that were not introduced in class and were
not covered in homeworks and practice exercises) I strongly recommend their reading to
complement lectures and slides, and to understand the material from a broader perspective.
Finally, please try to keep informed about what is going with the economy in reality by
reading articles published in publications such as The Economist, the Financial Times, or
the New York Times. I will try to address current economic events from time to time, and
discussing them is much more productive if you have heard about the news beforehand.

3

Level of the Class

Penn is considered one of the top universities in the country. Since we need to live up to our
reputation (your future wages depend on it!), we will cover a substantial amount of material
in 14 weeks, with lots of information. I will try to make it as interesting as possible but your
participation in class is key to achieve that goal. Your feedback is also key. If there is
something about the course that you think can be improved, please let me know. We are in
this together and the higher the quality of the class, the better for us all.
Your success in the class is very important to me I want to be available for addressing
your questions as well as possible. You can always ask questions in or after class, I will
hold regular office hours in my office 428, McNeil Economics Building and I will be available
for office hours by appointment. Additionally, you can always reach me via phone at (215)
898-1875 or, preferably, via email at ordonez@econ.upenn.edu.

4

Course Requirements and Grades

Students learn more if they keep a constant attention to the material, then, to keep you
motivated you will have three tests during the course, one approximately every four
weeks of class. These tests will take place during regular lecture hours (covering the whole
lecture time) and will include short questions and exercises.
In preparation for each test, I will post in advance a “representative test” in advance,
with an answer key so you will know what to expect. Each test will be worth 20 points.
There will be NO final. I will drop your worst test grade and replace it with the
average of the other two tests. If you are absent from one of the midterms, I can drop
2

those points from consideration. Take into account that I will drop your absolute worst grade,
not your worst grade relative to the rest of the class. The rationale is that I want to give you
an individual insurance for unpredictable shocks, not a strategic motive to skip exams.
In addition to the tests there will be 3 homeworks, each of which will be worth
10 points. You have one week to complete each homework, which is due at the end of the
assigned lecture (there will be a box in the classroom where you can drop your homework
the due date). NO excuses will be allowed for late homeworks except by the proviso below
regarding personal issues. Do not put your homework in my mailbox in McNeil or slide them
under the door of my office, and do not give them to any administrative assistant; I will not
be responsible for any such submissions. Electronic or Fax submissions will not be accepted.
If you have a problem with any of the dates homeworks are due and with more than
one of the dates for the exams, please let me know before September 5. After that day
I will NOT accommodate personal issues. Travel plans are not an acceptable reason for
rescheduling. In past years, a high percentage of conflicts with test dates were related with
religious holidays. The Office of the Chaplain at Penn has a calendar of religious holidays at
http://www.upenn.edu/chaplain/. You may want to check that calendar ASAP to solve
NOW possible conflicts.
We will make every effort to grade and hand back exams and homeworks in a week. If
you have complaints about the grading, do the following. Within 1 week after the test
was returned hand back to me your graded test and a written statement explaining your
complaint (i.e., which question you think was graded wrongly and why you think it was graded
wrongly). I will then regrade the whole assignment. Needless to say, I cannot guarantee that,
after the test has been regraded, your score will be higher than before and it may indeed be
lower. One week after the test has been returned the scores cannot be changed anymore and
no further complaints will be accepted.
Otherwise stated, all Policy procedures of the Department of Economics may be found in
the Undergrad Drop Down menu under Departmental Policies.

5

Grading Standards

Students taking the course for a letter grade will receive grades from A through D or an F.
Students that take the class on a Pass/Fail basis need at least a D+ to pass the class. Poor
performance is not a valid reason for an incomplete (I). An incomplete is given only under
exceptional circumstances and requires satisfactory completion of a substantial part of the
course.
DO NOT panic if your numerical score is low. The overall grading for the course will,
roughly, be on a curve. About 30%-35% of the students will be in the A’s; about 50% in
the B’s, and the rest in C’s and under. These fractions, however, are not written in stone
and if the class is doing well in general you should expect a larger fraction of A’s.

6

Contents of the Course

This is an outline of the topics that I intend to cover and the dates where I intend to do
so. The list of topics may be revised during the course as I may not be able to cover all the
3

material. Test and homework dates, however, are written in stone and will NOT change.
In the following table, (W) refers to Williamson’s book (with corresponding chapters and
pages), (N) refers to own notes to be posted in Canvas, and ” refers to the same suggested
reading as in the previous lecture.
Lecture

Topic

Suggested Reading

1 - Aug. 29
2 - Aug. 31
3 - Sep. 5
4 - Sep. 7
5 - Sep. 12
6 - Sep. 14
7 - Sep. 19
8 - Sep. 21
9 - Sep. 26
10 - Sep. 28

Introduction.
Brief History of Macroeconomics.
National Income Accounting.
NO CLASS
Households.
Firms.
Competitive Equilibrium.
Social Planner I.
Social Planner II.
Growth Facts I.
Homework 1 due.
Growth Facts II.
Test 1.
Growth Accounting I.
Growth Accounting II.
Solow Growth Model I.
Solow Growth Model II.
Endogenous Growth Models I.
Endogenous Growth Models II.
Homework 2 due.
Political Economy and Growth.
Test 2.
Real Business Cycle I.
Real Business Cycle II.
Fiscal Policy I.
Fiscal Policy II.
Money.
Homework 3 due.
Monetary Policy I.
Monetary Policy II.
Test 3.

(W-Ch.1)

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

-

Oct.
Oct.
Oct.
Oct.
Oct.
Oct.
Oct.
Oct.

3
10
12
17
19
24
26
31

19
20
21
22
23
24
25

-

Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.

2
7
9
14
16
21
18

26 - Nov. 30
27 - Dec. 5
28 - Dec. 7

4

(W-Ch. 2)
(N),
(N),
(N),
(N),

(W
(W
(W
(W

-

Ch.
Ch.
Ch.
Ch.

4, pp: 96-116)
4, pp: 116-131)
5, pp: 137-144)
5, pp: 144-150)
”
(W - Ch. 7, pp: 220-226)
”
(N), (W - Ch. 7, pp: 254-262)
”
(N), (W - Ch. 7, pp: 237-251)
”
(N), (W - Ch. 8)
”

(N), (W - Ch. 3)
”
(N), (W - Ch. 9, pp: 319-331)
”

