ECON 001
Introduction to Microeconomics
Fall 2017 Syllabus
Instructor: Anne Duchene Office: McNeil 553
Lecture: Meyerson B1 Mon-Wed 9-9:50 / 10-10:50 / 11-11:50 (section 003/001/002)
Office hours: Tuesday 11am-12:30pm / Wednesday 1:30pm-3pm
E-mail: econ-001@sas.upenn.edu
Course Structure
Two lectures (Monday and Wednesday, 50 minutes each): Introduce concepts.
One recitation (Thursday or Friday, 50 minutes): Review concepts, solve problems, get
extra help from your recitation instructor (RI). Recitations are an important part of this
course and are structured to help you push beyond the surface to achieve a higher order
level of understanding. You should attend lectures and recitations (exam questions will
assume you attended all lectures and recitations.). Attendance will be taken in recitation.
All the recitation sessions for this course with their locations and instructors are listed in
the course registrar's website: http://www.upenn.edu/registrar/roster/econ.html.
Required Materials
Canvas:
Login in Canvas system at www.library.upenn.edu/courseware. This course
website is very important for your study. I will post announcements, lecture
slides, recitation material, homework assignments, grades, etc. You should have
one site for this course, a lecture-wide site. Recitation level groups are formed
within this site to allow your TA to communicate with the recitation group
separately.
PowerPoint slides will be posted on Canvas before the material on the slides is
covered in class. During class, I will not talk at a pace that allows you time to
copy all the material on these slides. I strongly suggest printing the slides out,
placing them in a binder, and then taking notes from class on the printouts.
MyEconLab:
Signup to MyLab and Mastering system (from within Canvas), a companion
website to complete the online assignments and access the online copy of the
textbook (if you choose to purchase access to the e-book). You are required to

sign up using your Penn email address. Failure to do so will lead to a loss of 1
point from your overall score. More details and “how to signup” are available in a
separate document posted on Canvas.
Textbook: Parkin: Microeconomics, Pearson.
You	do	NOT	have	to	purchase	the	most	recent	version	(12th	edition)	of	this	
textbook.	If you are looking for a cheaper option:	
- You can buy an older edition (preferably not older than 10th edition), or
- You can opt to have an electronic copy of the book with your MyEconLab
subscription, and not purchase the hard copy.
Poll Everywhere
Starting in class 4, on September 13, I will ask 3 questions at the end of every
Wednesday lecture. All questions will be asked using Poll Everywhere. I will open the
poll during classes such that students can answer the question and will close the poll a
little later. To answer the questions students will need to bring either a smart phone, a
tablet, or a laptop.
Each student will need to create an account on Poll Everywhere and join the group Econ
001 Fall 2017 using the following link:
www.polleverywhere.com/register?p=2ium5-1eu2&pg=cB3HApf&u=4L2QssB3
You will be asked your email address and your phone number (if you will be
participating via SMS texting). You are required to sign up using your Penn email
address. Failure to do so will lead to a loss of 1 point from your overall score. Your
information is protected, and Poll Everywhere will never share emails or phone numbers
with any third party.
Course Objective
Econ 001 provides a thorough introduction to microeconomic theory. Starting from the
basic ideas of tradeoffs, opportunity cost, and the benefits of trade, we will study how the
market forces of supply and demand cause prices to be what they are. We will see the
sense in which market economies are efficient, and the way governments can make our
economy less or more efficient. We will delve behind the supply curve to see how firms
choose their production levels to maximize profits, culminating in the model of perfect
competition. We will look at market failures such as imperfect competition (monopoly,
oligopoly), externalities and asymmetric information.
Evaluation Criteria
Your grade will be determined on a standard 100 point scale. A range: 90% to 100%, B
range: 80%-89%, C range: 70%-79%, D range: 60%-69%, F: 59% and below. If I feel

that a curve is necessary it will be determined separately for each exam and announced
on canvas when exam grades are posted. Grading in the course will be based upon
assignments, quizzes, two midterm exams and a cumulative final exam. A breakdown of
the scoring appears in the table below.
Task
MyEconLab Assignments
Canvas Assignments
Poll everywhere participation
Recitation participation
Worst of your two Midterm scores
Best of your two Midterm scores
Final Exam (cumulative)
Total

% of Course Grade
12%
8%
3%
2%
20%
25%
30%
100%

Homework Assignments (MyEconLab and Canvas)
Each week you will have to complete two types of homework assignments: through
MyEconLab and through Canvas. All MyEconLab assignments are due on Fridays at
6PM, while all Canvas assignments are due on Sundays at 6PM (see schedule on the last
page of this syllabus). The level of difficulty is not the same: MyEconLab assignments
are a direct application of the concepts covered in lectures, while Canvas assignments are
closer to recitation material, the two latter being the best match to exam questions.
Therefore it is recommended that each week you complete the Canvas assignment after
having completed the MyEconLab assignment, as it requires a deeper understanding of
the material.
MyEconLab Homework:
There will be a total of 11 MyEconLab assignments, each worth 15 points. To get
the full 100% credit, you must accrue at least 120 points (out of 165 cumulative
points available). If you accrue less than 120 points, your grade will be pro-rated.
For example, 60 points earn you 50%. If you get more than 120 points, good for
you! Nonetheless, the maximum credit is 120 points.
No late assignments will be accepted. The MyEconLab system will have strict
deadlines embedded and if you miss it there is nothing that can be done. Even
technical problems with your computer or with Internet connection are not
acceptable excuses. You have several days to submit each homework assignment
and quiz; do not leave the submission to the last hour of the last day that it is due.
MyEconLab keeps track of how you answer homework questions and, through its
Study Plan feature, recommends additional questions to help you brush-up on
topics where you need to do more work. You are strongly encouraged to
strengthen your grasp of the course material by working with MyEconLab's

sample test and study plan features. Homework assignments, sample tests and
study plan questions closely match chapters in the textbook.
Canvas Homework:
There will be a total of 11 assignments on Canvas, graded on completion. To
allow flexibility we allow three freebies. You will have to upload your answers
directly on Canvas. Your recitation instructor will view your answers on Canvas,
grade them for completion and give you a short feedback on your performance.
Late or incomplete homework assignments will receive a grade of zero.
Please be diligent in completing your assignments in a timely manner. If you get
stuck on any part of the assignment you are welcome to stop by office hours or to
ask your TA to go over a particular part or question in recitation. We do not
expect 100% success on these assignments, but rather 100% effort.
Feel free to study with other students and to discuss the assignments with your
classmates and in fact you are encouraged to do so. However, the work you turn
in should be your own. This is because working out problems is an essential
component to learning economics. Your performance on the exams is likely to be
correlated with your performance on assignments. Directly copying someone
else’s problem set will be considered cheating.
Poll Everywhere
At the end of 10 Wednesday sessions, there will be 3 Poll Everywhere questions. You get
one “participation” point for answering each question, and one bonus point for giving the
right answer. All 30 participation points count for 3% of your overall grade. These are
easy points and extra practice for the exam. All 30 bonus points can add up to 3%.
Poll questions are to be answered in class only. If you are found to be responding from
any other location, it will be considered a violation of academic integrity.
Recitation Participation
Recitation attendance is mandatory, but to allow flexibility you can have up to 3
absences. Class participation implies more than mere presence in recitation. We are
expecting an active, meaningful, thoughtful, and relevant contribution to class
discussions and other activities.
Exams
There will be three (3) exams. The final exam will be comprehensive. Exam dates can be
found in the course calendar at the end of this syllabus.
Midterms: 1h each, not cumulative. No books, notes, calculators, formula sheets. If
academic conflict: email your TA by email at least one week prior to the exam date. If

health/family emergency: contact your TA. There is only one make-up exam offered for
each midterm and only students who have a valid reason to miss a midterm are qualified
to take the make-up.
Final exam: 2h, cumulative. No books, no notes, no calculators, no formula sheets. The
makeup will be in January. There is absolutely no option of taking the final exam on any
other date in the Fall. Purchasing an early plane ticket is not a valid excuse to not take the
final.
Exams will be held on the following dates:
Ø Midterm 1
October 3 6:00-7:00PM (make-up date: October 4)
Ø Midterm 2
November 7 6:00-7:00PM (make-up date: November 8)
Ø Final Exam December 18 3:00-5:00PM (make-up date: January)
Important dates
MyEconLab grace period expires 14 days from the first day the student signs up
October 9: drop period ends;
November 10, last day to withdraw from a course without a W.
Course Expectations
The rule of thumb in college is that you study for at least 2 hours outside of class for each
hour you spend in class. This means you should spend a minimum of 6 hours per week
studying for ECON 1. Please know that it is highly unlikely that studying “a lot” the
week before the exam will make up for not studying enough in the weeks preceding the
exam! You may have been able to get away with this in the past. However, most ECON 1
students realize that this just doesn’t work in economics or with the way in which I teach
and test.
How to study
Read about each topic in the text before the topic is presented in class. If you have
already seen the material, the lectures will be easier to follow.
Come to class. If you miss a lecture, watch the recording on Canvas to catch up.
Take smart notes. The lecture outlines are on Canvas. Print those off and bring them to
the lecture to follow. You can bring your laptop to class, but this course is very graph
intensive, and you simply cannot graph fast enough with a computer. So bringing a pen
and paper and printed slides might be much more efficient.

After class, re-read the text. Sometimes the text will explain a concept in more details
than I did in class.
Do the MyEconLab homework assignment before the Canvas homework. If you get stuck
on any part of the assignment you are welcome to stop by office hours in advance of your
recitation or to ask your TA to go over a particular part or question in recitation. I will
add office hours before exams.
Form a small study group and make it a habit to meet at the same time each week.
Practice! Do the textbook questions, re-do the homework and recitation questions, use the
study plan feature on MyEconLab, do the practice exams, etc.
You will only be tested on the material covered in class. For example, I will not ask you a
test question that expects you to remember a topic or application from the text not
covered in class. Instead, the text should be used to help you understand the lectures.
If you find yourself falling behind, please see me. I’m here to help and I want you to
succeed! My posted office hours are when you are guaranteed to find me in my office. If
you have a conflict, you may arrange a meeting time outside office hours.
Whom to contact
•

•

•

•
•

Any question regarding homework grades, homework assignments, or the subject
matter of the course should be first sent to your recitation TA. If you do not get a
satisfactory or timely response, please email the email the ECON 1 team: econ001@sas.upenn.edu. You will get a response within one business day. Please note
if the question is particularly complex, you might be redirected to office hours, a
recitation session or a help session.
To join a section or change sections: you should email Lynn Costello, the
Undergraduate
Coordinator
in
the
Economics
department.
costello@econ.upenn.edu. Her office is McNeil 160. Lynn is also very
knowledgeable about major requirements and stuff like that.
Special needs/arrangements: Reasonable accommodation will be made for those
with special needs. Anyone eligible for special arrangements on examinations
must make sure I get notification from the Student Disability Services (SDS). If I
have not been contacted by SDS before an exam, I will not be able to
accommodate the student’s needs.
For Canvas: Go to http://www.library.upenn.edu/courseware/ and click “Support
for Students”
Personal questions (NOT related to the course logistics or material) should be
emailed to me directly at duchene@sas.upenn.edu. From Monday-Thursday, you
should expect a response to your email within 24 hours. From Friday-Sunday and
on holidays you should expect a response within 48 hours.

Policies
This syllabus is a contract. Deviation from these policies is not allowed.
Please refer to the following website for Economics department
https://economics.sas.upenn.edu/undergraduate-program/courseinformation/guidelines/policies

policies:

Attendance
In class: Show up on time. No distractions on your laptop for students sitting behind.
Generally, be attentive during lectures. There are many students in the lecture but I love it
when students ask questions, so please feel free to do so. I will try to answer them as
much as possible.
Homework: No late submission, no make-up, no extra credit.
Exams: Make-up for midterm and final exams only with valid excuses, as defined by the
University.
• Examples of valid excuses are:
o (*For final exam only*): Three final exams scheduled within one calendar
day. This policy of 3 exams does not count for midterm exams.
o An exam is given outside of the regular class schedule and the timing
conflicts with another class in which the student is enrolled.
o Observance of a university-recognized religious holiday.
o UPenn business that takes you away from campus (for example: athletic
events in which you are actively participating).
o An illness/health emergency.
o A death in your family.
• Examples that are not valid for missing an exam are:
o job internships;
o beginning the fall break early or returning after a scheduled exam;
o end of semester early flights;
All absences are notified through the CAR (Course Absence Report) system. The
University keeps a long-term track of whether you have a tendency to get sick during
exam times.
Regrading requests
• Regrading requests should first be brought to the attention of your TA.
• No regarding is possible for exams written in pencil, only with pens.
• Regrading is possible only when your grade is inconsistent with our published
grading policy
o Valid request: “question X on my quiz got 2 points less than what the
grading policy suggests”
o Invalid requests: “I’d like my entire midterm to be regarded”, or “I believe
your team allocated too few points to this question on the exam”

•
•
•

Requests must be typed and made within 1 week after the quiz or exam is
returned. We do not regrade the midterms or the quizzes right before / after you
take the final.
We will regrade your entire exam, so your grade might go up or down
The University allows us to keep copies of exams for our records, to assure
academic integrity. Any sign of academic dishonesty will be pursued.

Extra credit
There is no extra credit in this course. The reason is that if everyone knows about it, it's
not really extra credit. It's just another assignment. If some people don't know about it
(for instance, if a specific student asks for extra credit at the end of the semester), then
I'm treating my students differently, which I make every attempt to avoid.
Integrity
Penn has a clear Code of Academic Integrity. It’s your responsibility to familiarize
yourself with the code, and to follow it to the letter:
www.upenn.edu/academicintegrity/ai_codeofacademicintegrity.html
In particular, you are expected to
• maintain a professional, respectful environment
• be courteous to me and your TAs
• not disrupt class (be quiet if entering class late, turn off electronic devices, do not
chat).
• Never present work that is not your own

Weekly class schedule
Date
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

8/30
9/06
9/11
9/13
9/18
9/20
9/25
9/27
10/02
10/03
10/04
10/09
10/11
10/16
10/18
10/23
10/25
10/30
11/01
11/06
11/07
11/08
11/13
11/15
11/20
11/22
11/27
11/29
12/04
12/06
12/11
12/18

Text
Chapter
Introduction and Opportunity Cost
Ch. 1
Scarcity and Choice
Ch. 2
Gains from Trade
Ch. 2
Supply & Demand
Ch. 3
Elasticity
Ch. 4
Efficiency and Equity
Ch.5
Applications of S&D: price controls, taxes, subsidies Ch.6
Externalities
Ch.17
Review for MT1
MT1 on Tuesday October 3, 6-7PM
No class on Wednesday October 4
Fall break: no recitation on October 5-6
Firm and Costs of Production
Ch. 10-11
Perfect Competition part I
Ch. 12
Perfect Competition part II
Ch. 12
Monopoly part I
Ch. 13
Monopoly part II
Ch. 13
Monopolistic competition
Ch. 14
Oligopoly
Ch. 15
Public Goods
Ch. 16
Review for MT2
MT2 on Tuesday, November 7, 6-7PM
No class on Wednesday November 8.
Consumer Theory part I
Ch. 9
Consumer Theory part II
Ch. 9
Behavioral Economics
Ch. 8 end
No lecture AND no recitation
Market for labor part I
Ch. 18
Market for labor part II
Ch. 18
Market for labor part III
Ch. 18
Economic Inequality
Ch. 19
Review for Final exam
Final 3-5PM on Monday, December 18
Topic

Comments
Register Poll Everywhere
Register MyEconLab

Make up for MT1 6PM

Make up for MT2 6PM

Happy Thanksgiving!

Make up in January *only*

Homework assignments due dates (all assignments due at 6PM) and in-class quizzes
dates:
Week
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
Week 16

Poll Everywhere
in-class quizzes
All on Wednesdays
Quiz 1 on 09/13
Quiz 2 on 09/20
Quiz 3 on 09/27
Quiz 4 on 10/11
Quiz 5 on 10/18
Quiz 6 on 10/25
Quiz 7 on 11/01
Quiz 8 on 11/15
Quiz 9 on 11/29
Quiz 10 on 12/06

MyEconLab (MEL)
Homework
All due Fridays 6PM
MEL HW1 due 09/08
MEL HW2 due 09/15
MEL HW3 due 09/22
MEL HW4 due 09/29
Midterm 1 week
MEL HW5 due 10/13
MEL HW6 due 10/20
MEL HW7 due 10/27
MEL HW8 due 11/03
Midterm 2 week
MEL HW9 due 11/17
Thanksgiving week
MEL HW10 due 12/01
MEL HW11 due 12/08

Canvas Homework
All due Sundays 6PM
Canvas HW1 due 09/10
Canvas HW2 due 09/17
Canvas HW3 due 09/24
Canvas HW4 due 10/01
Canvas HW5 due 10/15
Canvas HW6 due 10/22
Canvas HW7 due 10/29
Canvas HW8 due 11/05
Canvas HW9 due 11/19
Canvas HW10 due 12/03
Canvas HW11 due 12/10

