SYLLABUS
Econ 209 section 004, Macroeconomic Analysis and Applications.
Winter 2017
Class time: Monday and Wednsday, 02:35 PM-03:55 PM
Class location: Leacock 219
Instructor: Irakli Japaridze
Leacock room 437, irakli.japaridze@mail.mcgill.ca
Office hours:
To be confirmed
Introduction
The course is intended to equip students with basic knowledge in Macroeconomics. We will go
over basic concepts and notions in macroeconomics and will see several practical applications of
the theory. This will help you to understand how macroeconomic variables are related to each
other and how they interact as well as how government policy intervention can affect economic
performance. This course does not have calculus requirement though knowing it is always an
asset.
Material to be covered and books.
I will follow "Macroeconomics" textbook by Ragan 14-th or 15-th edition. All chapters of the
book are on the agenda however depending on the progress we may omit some chapters. The
chapters which may be omitted are in Italics. Chapters from the book are presented below.
Macroeconomics
Chapter 19: What Macroeconomics Is All About
Chapter 20: The Measurement of National Income
Part Eight: The Economy in the Short Run
Chapter 21: The Simplest Short-Run Macro Model
Chapter 22: Adding Government and Trade to the Simple Macro Model
Chapter 23: Output and Prices in the Short Run
Part Nine: The Economy in the Long Run
Chapter 24: From the Short Run to the Long Run: The Adjustment of Factor Prices
Chapter 25: The Difference Between Short-Run and Long-Run Macroeconomics
Chapter 26: Long-Run Economic Growth
Part Ten: Money, Banking, and Monetary Policy
Chapter 27: Money and Banking
Chapter 28: Money, Interest Rates, and Economic Activity
Chapter 29: Monetary Policy in Canada

Part Eleven: Macroeconomic Problems and Policies
Chapter 30: Inflation and Disinflation
Chapter 31: Unemployment Fluctuations and the NAIRU
Chapter 32: Government Debt and Deficits
Part Twelve: Canada in the Global Economy
Chapter 33: The Gains from International Trade
Chapter 34: Trade Policy
Chapter 35: Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments
Chapter 36: Challenges Facing the Developing Countries

You can get your personal copy from Paragraphe Bookstore, 2220 McGill College Avenue.
[Tel: (514) 845-5811]. The book has also its Study Guide by Dickinson & Indart which is very
useful for study as it has lots of practice questions which are very similar to ones you will have
on exams. There is also MyEconlab online study tool. It gives you the online version of the book,
and lots of practice questions on each chapter. The book, study guide and online access code can
be bought as a bundle.
Conferences (tutorials).
Depending on availability of a Teaching Assistant, there will be conferences which will be
offered parallel to lectures. The conference will be led by a Teaching Assistant. He/she will
present and solve problems for you. The problems will be similar to what you will have on
midterm and final examination. The details on place and schedule of conferences will be
announced in the class.
Evaluation.
There will be a midterm at which will worth 30 % of the final grade. There will be a final
examination which will worth 70 % of the final grade. All exams will be in "multiple choice"
format. Additionally, depending on your progress, we may have several small group
assignments. In case you will be given assignments, the final exam's weight will be reduced to
60 %.
Office hours and contact.
I will hold office hours so you can come and discuss any course related question.
The schedule for of the office hours will be announced in class. You can reach me
by my email indicated above or writing a message in MyCourses.
The Teaching Assistants will hold office hours too, so you can visit Teaching Assistant during
office hours with questions related to problems solving. The place and schedule will be
announced in the class.

These statements is compulsory for McGill courses. Please read this carefully.
Academic Integrity:
McGill University values academic integrity. Therefore, all students must understand the
meaning and consequences of cheating, plagiarism and other academic offences under the
Code of Student Conduct and Disciplinary Procedures (see
www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/ for more information).(Approved by Senate on 29
January 2003)
L'université McGill attache une haute importance à l’honnêteté académique. Il incombe par
conséquent à tous les étudiants de comprendre ce que l'on entend par tricherie, plagiat et
autres infractions académiques, ainsi que les conséquences que peuvent avoir de telles
actions, selon le Code de conduite de l'étudiant et des procédures disciplinaires (pour de plus
amples renseignements, veuillez consulter le site www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/).
Language of Submission:
In accord with McGill University’s Charter of Students’ Rights, students in this course have
the right to submit in English or in French any written work that is to be graded. (Approved
by Senate on 21 January 2009 - see also the section in this document on Assignments and
Evaluation.)
Conformément à la Charte des droits de l’étudiant de l’Université McGill, chaque étudiant a
le droit de soumettre en français ou en anglais tout travail écrit devant être noté (sauf dans le
cas des cours dont l’un des objets est la maîtrise d’une langue).

