SYLLABUS
Econ 230, Microeconomics.
Fall 2016
Class time: Monday and Wednesday, 04:05-5:25 PM
Class location: MAASS 112
Instructor: Irakli Japaridze
Leacock room 437, irakli.japaridze@mail.mcgill.ca
Office hours:
Monday 12:00-2:00 pm
Tuesday 12:00-2:00 pm
Introduction
The course is intended to equip students with knowledge in Microeconomics.
We will go over basic concepts and notions in microeconomics and will see several practical
applications of the theory. This will help you to understand the principles of market economy,
the concepts of supply and demand. We will study the rational consumer’s consumption choice
and profit-maximizing producer’s production choice to identify what lies behind the demand and
the supply in the market. We will briefly touch on efficiency of the market based economics and
how one may study the effects of government interventions on the efficiency of the system and
the welfare of the people.
This is a year-long course, the Winter term will be taught by Professor Benchekroun. Note that
your final mark will be based on your performance during Fall and Winter terms.
The will be a supplemental examination for the year-long course. Supplemental examination for
those eligible will cover material from Econ 230D1 and Econ230D2 and it will be held in August
after Econ 230D2 is completed in April. The weight for Econ 230D1 would be (50%) and for
Econ 230D2 would be (50%).
Material to be covered and books.
I will follow "Microeconomics" textbook by Jeffrey Perloff, 7th edition (the book will be used
also during the Winter term). We will study from chapters 1 to chapter 10. We will also study
decision making under uncertainty which is not in the textbook (material will be provided).
Chapters from the book are presented below.
Microeconomics
Part One: An Introduction to Demand and Supply
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Supply and Demand
Chapter 3: Applying Supply-and-Demand model
Part Two: Consumers
Chapter 4: Consumer Choice
Chapter 5: Applying Consumer Theory
Decision Making Under Uncertainty

Part Three: Producers
Chapter 6: Firms and Production
Chapter 7: Costs
Chapter 8: Competitive Firms and Market
Part Five: Factor Markets
Chapter 9: Applying Competitive Model
Chapter 14: General Equilibrium and Economic Welfare
You can get your personal copy from Paragraphe Bookstore, 2220 McGill College Avenue. [Tel:
(514) 845-5811]. The book has also its Study Guide which is very useful for study as it has lots
of practice questions which are very similar to ones you will have on exams. There is also
MyEconlab online study tool. It gives you the online version of the book, and lots of practice
questions on each chapter. The book, study guide and online access code can be bought as a
bundle. Please verify if buying the full package will give an access to slides accompanying the
book, as I will not be posting the slides (except for “Choice under Uncertainty”). The
instructions for registering on MyEconLab can be found on MyCourses.
Conferences (tutorials).
Depending on availability of Teaching Assistant, there will be conferences which will be offered
parallel to lectures. The conference will be led by a Teaching Assistants. They will present and
solve problems for you. The problems will be similar to what you will have on midterm and final
examination. The details on place and schedule of conferences will be announced in the class.
Evaluation.
We will have several mini-exams (I plan to make them on-line using MyEconLab) which will
contribute 15 % to your final grade. There will be a midterm at which will worth 25 % of the
final grade. There will be a final examination which will worth 60 % of the final grade. The final
examination is will be of mixed multiple-choice questions and short questions.
Office hours and contact.
I will hold office hours so you can come and discuss any course related question.
The schedule for of the office hours will be announced in class. You can reach me
by my email indicated above or writing a message in MyCourses.
The Teaching Assistants (TA) will hold office hours too, so you can visit Teaching Assistant
during office hours with questions related to problems solving. The place and schedule will be
announced in the class.
The TAs are:
Chinh Hoang chinh.hoang@mail.mcgill.ca
Gabriel Velasquez gabriel.velasquez@mail.mcgill.ca
Qi Xu qi.xu@mail.mcgill.ca

I expect that you will:
•

•
•
•
•

First and foremost, be well-trained in algebra. When I say well-trained, I do not mean that
you once upon a time saw solution to system of linear equations, etc. I expect you to be
fluent and not waste time recalling algebraic operations and rules. Fluency in algebra is a
MUST!
Attend classes regularly. I will be using black board actively. Things on the blackboard
usually are not found in the book, and yet they will be on exams.
Check myCourses and myEconLab regularly
Read the material before coming to the class
Be active in the class, ask questions and answer questions I pose

These statements is compulsory for McGill courses. Please read this carefully.
Academic Integrity:
McGill University values academic integrity. Therefore, all students must understand the
meaning and consequences of cheating, plagiarism and other academic offences under the
Code of Student Conduct and Disciplinary Procedures (see
www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/ for more information).(Approved by Senate on 29
January 2003)
L'université McGill attache une haute importance à l’honnêteté académique. Il incombe par
conséquent à tous les étudiants de comprendre ce que l'on entend par tricherie, plagiat et
autres infractions académiques, ainsi que les conséquences que peuvent avoir de telles
actions, selon le Code de conduite de l'étudiant et des procédures disciplinaires (pour de plus
amples renseignements, veuillez consulter le site www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/).
Language of Submission:
In accord with McGill University’s Charter of Students’ Rights, students in this course have
the right to submit in English or in French any written work that is to be graded. (Approved
by Senate on 21 January 2009 - see also the section in this document on Assignments and
Evaluation.)
Conformément à la Charte des droits de l’étudiant de l’Université McGill, chaque étudiant a
le droit de soumettre en français ou en anglais tout travail écrit devant être noté (sauf dans le
cas des cours dont l’un des objets est la maîtrise d’une langue).

