Ec 122. Econometrics. 9 units (3-0-6); first term. Prerequisites: Ma 3.
The application of statistical techniques to the analysis of economic data.
Instructor: Sherman. 

Course Description: Econometrics is the study of y’s and x’s and u’s. The y’s are observed
economic response variables, the x’s are observed variables that determine the y’s in some way,
and the u’s are unobserved variables that also determine the y’s. For example, y could be
wages, the x’s might include variables like education and experience, and the u’s might involve
variables like ability and motivation. In this example, one may want to determine the rate of
return to education, that is, the effect of an additional year of schooling on expected wages.
Data is collected on the y’s and x’s. Interest centers on using the data together with economics,
statistics and computing to (i) determine the causal effect of one of the x’s on IE(y | x) (ii)
predict values of y given the x’s and (iii) test economic theories about the relationship between
the x’s and y. This class will emphasize objectives (i) and (iii). As we will see, the relationship
between the x’s and the u’s will be critically important in determining how difficult it will be to
achieve these objectives. The hope is that by the end of the class you will begin to understand
something of what constitutes sound econometric analysis.

Required textbooks:
hill, r. carter,griffiths, william e.,lim, guay c.; principles of econometrics (4th), wiley, 2011. ISBN:
978-0-470-62673-3
Brief Contents
Chapter 1 An Introduction to Econometrics
Probability Primer
Chapter 2 The Simple Linear Regression Model
Chapter 3 Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing
Chapter 4 Prediction, Goodness-of-Fit, and Modeling Issues
Chapter 5 The Multiple Regression Model
Chapter 6 Further Inference in the Multiple Regression Model
Chapter 7 Using Indicator Variables
Chapter 8 Heteroskedasticity
Chapter 9 Regression with Time-Series Data: Stationary Variables
Chapter 10 Random Regressors and Moment-Based Estimation
Chapter 11 Simultaneous Equations Models
Chapter 12 Regression with Time-Series Data: Nonstationary Variables
Chapter 13 Vector Error Correction and Vector Autoregressive Models
Chapter 14 Time-Varying Volatility and ARCH Models
Chapter 15 Panel Data Models
Chapter 16 Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variable Models
Appendix A Mathematical Tools
Appendix B Probability Concepts
Appendix C Review of Statistical Inference
Appendix D Tables
Index

