Ec 11. Introduction to Economics. 9 units (3-2-4); first, second terms. An
introduction to economic methodology, models, and institutions. Includes
both basic microeconomics and an introduction to modern approaches to
macroeconomic issues. Students are required to participate in economics
experiments. Instructors: Plott, Rangel.
Ec 97. Undergraduate Research. Units to be arranged; any term.
Prerequisites:Advanced economics and instructor’s permission. This course offers
advanced undergraduates the opportunity to pursue research in Economics
individually or in a small group. Graded pass/fail. 
515
Ec 98 abc. Senior Research and Thesis. Prerequisite: instructor’s permission.
Senior economics majors wishing to undertake research may elect a variable
number of units, not to exceed 12 in any one term, for such work under the
direction of a member of the economics faculty.
Ec 101. Selected Topics in Economics. Units to be determined by arrangement
with the instructor; offered by announcement. Topics to be determined by
instructor. Instructors: Staff, visiting lecturers.
Ec 105. Industrial Organization. 9 units (3-0-6); first term. Prerequisites:
Ec 11 or equivalent. A study of how technology affects issues of
market structure and how market structure affects observable economic
outcomes, such as prices, profits, advertising, and research and development
expenditures. Emphasis will be on how the analytic tools
developed in the course can be used to examine particular industries—
especially those related to internet commerce—in detail. Each student is
expected to write one substantial paper. Not offered 2016–17.
Ec 106. Topics in Applied Industrial Organization. 9 units (3-0-6); first
term. Prerequisite: Ec 11; Ec 116 recommended. Topics include simulation of
mergers in oligopolistic industries, valuation of intellectual property, price
setting and concentration in the pharmaceutical market, and statistical
analysis of combined tobacco and asbestos exposure. A term paper will be
required. Not offered 2016–17.
Ec/Psy 109. Frontiers in Behavioral Economics. 9 units (3-0-6), first term.
Prerequisites: Ec 11. Behavioral economics studies agents who are biologically
limited in computational ability, willpower and pure self-interest. An
important focus is how those limits interact with economic institutions
and firm behavior. This reading-driven course will cover new papers that
are interesting and draw attention to a topic of importance to economics.
Readings will cover lab and field experiments, axiomatic models of behavioral
phenomena, and welfare. Each weekly discussion will begin with a
10-minute overview, then an inspection of the paper’s scientific machinery,
judge whether its conclusions are justified, and speculate about the scope
of its generalizability. It should help students as referees and as writers. Assignments
are two 1000-word summary-critiques. Not offered 2016–17.
Ec 116. Contemporary Socioeconomic Problems. 9 units (3-0-6). Prerequisites:
Ec 11 and PS 12 or equivalents. An analytical investigation of the
economic aspects of certain current social issues. Topics: the economics of
education, medical-care systems, urban affairs, and the welfare system. Not
offered 2016–17.
Ec 121 ab. Theory of Value. 9 units (3-0-6); first, second terms. Prerequisites:
Ec 11 and Ma 2 (may be taken concurrently). A study of consumer preference,
the structure and conduct of markets, factor pricing, measures of economic
efficiency, and the interdependence of markets in reaching a general equilibrium.
Instructors: Border, Saito
Varian, Hal; Microeconomic Analysis (3rd), Norton, 1992. 
TOC
Technology
Profit maximization
Profit function
Cost minimization
Cost function
Duality
Utility maximization
Choice
Demand
Consumers' supplies
Uncertainty
Econometrics
Competitive markets
Monopoly
Game theory
Oligopoly
Exchange
Production
Time
Asset markets
Equilibrium analysis
Welfare
Public goods
Externalities
Information
Mathematics
Optimization.
