EMET4308/EMET8008 - Econometric
Theory 

This is an advanced course on econometric theory. It intends to cover GMM, basic panel
data and time series models.

Applied Macro and Financial Econometrics
This course will examine modern applied research on macroeconomic and financial issues. The
main objective is to allow students to understand and critically appraise applied work on
macroeconomic and financial topics.

Enders, W. Applied Econometric Time Series, Wiley, 2014.Chapter 1: Difference Equations

Chapter 2: Stationary Time-Series Models

Chapter 3: Modeling Volatility

Chapter 4: Models with Trend

Chapter 5: Multiequation Time-Series Models

Chapter 6: Cointegration and Error-Correction Models

Chapter 7: Nonlinear Models and Breaks


Economic Models and Introductory
Econometrics
This is a unit in basic econometrics, emphasising the problems involved in the empirical
measurement of economic relationships and the techniques used to solve these problems.
While the application of econometric techniques is of prime importance, the results are not
just presented but derived using a mixture of rigour and intuition so as to leave as few
loose ends as possible.


Hill, R.C., Griffiths, W.E. and G.C. Lim (2011) Principles of Econometrics, 4th
edition, Wiley, New Jersey.
Chapter 1 An Introduction to Econometrics
Probability Primer
Chapter 2 The Simple Linear Regression Model
Chapter 3 Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing
Chapter 4 Prediction, Goodness-of-Fit, and Modeling Issues
Chapter 5 The Multiple Regression Model
Chapter 6 Further Inference in the Multiple Regression Model
Chapter 7 Using Indicator Variables
Chapter 8 Heteroskedasticity
Chapter 9 Regression with Time-Series Data: Stationary Variables
Chapter 10 Random Regressors and Moment-Based Estimation
Chapter 11 Simultaneous Equations Models
Chapter 12 Regression with Time-Series Data: Nonstationary Variables
Chapter 13 Vector Error Correction and Vector Autoregressive Models
Chapter 14 Time-Varying Volatility and ARCH Models
Chapter 15 Panel Data Models
Chapter 16 Qualitative and Limited Dependent Variable Models

Econometris II: Econometric Models
This course presents and develops techniques necessary for the quantitative analysis of economic
and business problems that are beyond the scope of the simple linear regression model covered in
EMET2007 or STAT2008. Topics include: endogeneity, instrumental variables estimation, natural
experiments, binary dependent variables, and panel data estimation. This is a hand-on course
with a focus on applications in economics as well as business. A standard statistical software will
be used during computer sessions, no special programming skills are required.

Introduction to Econometrics (updated third edition, 2014) by Stock
and Watson.
Part I. Introduction and Review  
Chapter 1. Economic Questions and Data
Chapter 2. Review of Probability 
Chapter 3. Review of Statistics 
Part II. Fundamentals of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 4. Linear Regression with One Regressor
Chapter 5. Regression with a Single Regressor: Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals  
Chapter 6. Linear Regression with Multiple Regressors  
Chapter 7. Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals in Multiple Regression  
Chapter 8. Nonlinear Regression Functions  
Chapter 9. Assessing Studies Based on Multiple Regression  
Part III. Further Topics in Regression Analysis  
Chapter 10. Regression with Panel Data 
Chapter 11. Regression with a Binary Dependent Variable  
Chapter 12. Instrumental Variables Regression  
Chapter 13. Experiments and Quasi-Experiments
Part IV. Regression Analysis of Economic Time Series Data  
Chapter 14. Introduction to Time Series Regression and Forecasting 
Chapter 15. Estimation of Dynamic Causal Effects  
Chapter 16. Additional Topics in Time Series Regression 
Part V. The Econometric Theory of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 17. The Theory of Linear Regression with One Regressor 
Chapter 18. The Theory of Multiple Regression  