EC3303 Econometrics I
This is a basic econometrics module that requires a background in statistical analysis similar to EC2303 Foundations for Econometrics. This module is aimed at providing a
user-friendly introduction to basic econometric techniques and commercial software packages such as Eviews and Excel to carry out simple regression analyses. The major
topics covered include a review of probability distributions and statistical inference, rudiments of matrix algebra, classical linear regression model with two or more variables,
estimation and hypothesis testing, and violation of classical assumptions and some remedial measures.

EC3304 Econometrics II
This module builds upon the background provided in EC3303 Econometrics I and provides an application oriented coverage to a number of topics. The module begin with a
review of the multiple regression model and moves on to topics such as autoregressive distributed lag models, micro-econometrics, panel regressions, and limited dependent
variable regressions.
Introduction to Time Series Regression and Forecasting 
Dynamic Causal Effects 
Cointegration 
Panel Data
Regression with Binary Dependent Variable 
Instrumental Variables Regression 


EC4303 Econometrics III
This module is aimed at consolidating what was covered in Econometrics I and II and provide a reasonable training in econometric theory and sound empirical analyses. In
addition the module will cover non-linear models, time series econometrics (including cointegration and error correction models), simultaneous equations models and more on
other topics such as microeconometrics. The module will be highly useful for honours theses that deal with applied problems.

Topics
1.   Ordinary Least Squares Estimation
2.   Linear Probability Model / Maximum Likelihood Estimation
3.   Nonparametric Regression
4.   Quantile Regression
5.   ARMA model
6.   GARCH model
7.   LASSO
8.   Panel Data Models
9.   Program Evaluation I: DID Estimation
10. Program Evaluation II: IV Regression
11. Program Evaluation III: Regression Discontinuity
12. Classification and Regression Tree