Introduction to Econometrics
We analyze the linear model as a tool for describing relationships in economic data and
associated disciplined. In particular, we will focus on best linear predictors under square
loss and analyze this prediction problem in details using cross sectional data. We discuss
nonlinear models and their approximations using linear models. Topics include: multiple
regression, instrumental variables regression, analysis of random experiments and
quasi-experiments, and regression with time series data. Students will learn how to
conduct and critique empirical studies. The course gives sufficient details on the theory
but will focus on applications. Prerequisite: Statistics 104 or equivalent.


J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson, Introduction to Econometrics (third edition update),
Addison-Wesley, 2015.
Table of Contents
Part I. Introduction and Review  
Chapter 1. Economic Questions and Data
Chapter 2. Review of Probability 
Chapter 3. Review of Statistics 
Part II. Fundamentals of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 4. Linear Regression with One Regressor
Chapter 5. Regression with a Single Regressor: Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals  
Chapter 6. Linear Regression with Multiple Regressors  
Chapter 7. Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals in Multiple Regression  
Chapter 8. Nonlinear Regression Functions  
Chapter 9. Assessing Studies Based on Multiple Regression  
Part III. Further Topics in Regression Analysis  
Chapter 10. Regression with Panel Data 
Chapter 11. Regression with a Binary Dependent Variable  
Chapter 12. Instrumental Variables Regression  
Chapter 13. Experiments and Quasi-Experiments
Part IV. Regression Analysis of Economic Time Series Data  
Chapter 14. Introduction to Time Series Regression and Forecasting 
Chapter 15. Estimation of Dynamic Causal Effects  
Chapter 16. Additional Topics in Time Series Regression 
Part V. The Econometric Theory of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 17. The Theory of Linear Regression with One Regressor 
Chapter 18. The Theory of Multiple Regression  