ECON 251 - Introduction to Statistics and Econometrics II
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamentals of econometric analysis. To this end, the primary focus is on simple and multiple linear regressions under the classical assumptions. Extensions include testing hypotheses for single and multiple linear restrictions; regression with binary variables, basic regression with time series data, and other deviations from the classical assumptions. More advanced topics can include instrumental variable estimation,the difference-in-differences estimator, and basic panel data analysis.

The course will put a heavy emphasis on empirical applications; econometric theory will be discussed where necessary but will not be the central focus.


ECON 451 - Intermediate Introduction to Statistics and Econometrics I
ECON 451 is an introduction to mathematical statistics that requires fluency with advanced differential calculus. The purpose is to provide students with an understanding of the fundamentals of statistical inference; to this end, the course will put an emphasis on concepts, rather than only applications. Topics include probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables and their probability distributions, multivariate and conditional distributions, sampling distributions, testing hypotheses,
 properties of estimators including maximum likelihood and method of moments, and least squares.

ECON 452 - Intermediate Introduction to Statistics and Econometrics II
This course, a continuation of ECON 451, is intended to prepare students to conduct empirical research in economics. The classical linear regression model is developed with special emphasis on the basic assumptions of the model, economic situations in which the assumptions are violated, and alternative estimation procedures that are appropriate in these cases. 
Computer exercises are used to introduce students to special problems encountered in the analysis of economic data.


INTRO ECONOMETRICS MODERN APPRCH., Author: Wooldridge., Publisher: Cengage Learning 2015
Chapter 1 The Nature of Econometrics and Economic Data 1
PART 1: Regression Analysis with Cross-Sectional Data 21
Chapter 2 The Simple Regression Model 22
Chapter 3 Multiple Regression Analysis: Estimation 68
Chapter 4 Multiple Regression Analysis: Inference 118
Chapter 5 Multiple Regression Analysis: OLS Asymptotics 168
Chapter 6 Multiple Regression Analysis: Further Issues 186
Chapter 7 Multiple Regression Analysis with Qualitative
Information: Binary (or Dummy) Variables 227
Chapter 8 Heteroskedasticity 268
Chapter 9 More on Specification and Data Issues 303
PART 2: Regression Analysis with Time Series Data 343
Chapter 10 Basic Regression Analysis with Time Series Data 344
Chapter 11 Further Issues in Using OLS with Time Series Data 380
Chapter 12 Serial Correlation and Heteroskedasticity in Time Series Regressions 412
PART 3: Advanced Topics 447
Chapter 13 Pooling Cross Sections Across Time: Simple Panel Data Methods 448
Chapter 14 Advanced Panel Data Methods 484
Chapter 15 Instrumental Variables Estimation and Two Stage Least Squares 512
Chapter 16 Simultaneous Equations Models 554
Chapter 17 Limited Dependent Variable Models and Sample Selection Corrections 583
Chapter 18 Advanced Time Series Topics 632
Chapter 19 Carrying Out an Empirical Project