Econ 131a. Econometrics and Data Analysis I
Basic probability theory and statistics, distribution theory, estimation and inference, bivariate regression, introduction to multivariate regression, introduction to statistical computing.
This course will teach you how to evaluate quantitative information and how to use data to
answer quantitative questions in the social sciences. We will cover three main areas:
1. The first area, probability, provides a foundation for modeling uncertainties, such as the
uncertainties faced by financial investors, insurers, and individuals in everyday life. We
will study the mechanics of probability (manipulating some probabilities to get others)
and the use of probability to make judgments about uncertain events.
2. The second area, statistics, provides techniques for interpreting data, such as what a
marketing department might know about past consumer purchases. Statistical methods
permit us to use small amounts of information to answer larger questions.
3. The third area, linear regression, is an area of statistics dedicated to estimating the
relationships between two or more variables. For example, we might be interested in
estimating the demand for health insurance as a function of the price, insurance policy
attributes and consumer attributes.

Introduction to Econometrics, 2nd or 3rd edition, by
Stock and Watson (Addison-Wesley, 2010)

Table of Contents


Part I. Introduction and Review  
Chapter 1. Economic Questions and Data
Chapter 2. Review of Probability 
Chapter 3. Review of Statistics 
Part II. Fundamentals of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 4. Linear Regression with One Regressor
Chapter 5. Regression with a Single Regressor: Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals  
Chapter 6. Linear Regression with Multiple Regressors  
Chapter 7. Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals in Multiple Regression  
Chapter 8. Nonlinear Regression Functions  
Chapter 9. Assessing Studies Based on Multiple Regression  
Part III. Further Topics in Regression Analysis  
Chapter 10. Regression with Panel Data 
Chapter 11. Regression with a Binary Dependent Variable  
Chapter 12. Instrumental Variables Regression  
Chapter 13. Experiments and Quasi-Experiments
Part IV. Regression Analysis of Economic Time Series Data  
Chapter 14. Introduction to Time Series Regression and Forecasting 
Chapter 15. Estimation of Dynamic Causal Effects  
Chapter 16. Additional Topics in Time Series Regression 
Part V. The Econometric Theory of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 17. The Theory of Linear Regression with One Regressor 
Chapter 18. The Theory of Multiple Regression  

Econ 132a. Econometrics and Data Analysis II
Continuation of Econ 131, with a focus on multivariate regression. Topics include statistical inference, choice of functional form, heteroskedasticity, serial correlation, two-stage least squares,
qualitative choice models, time series models, and forecasting. Emphasis on statistical computing and the mechanics of how to conduct and present empirical research.



Overview
This course introduces ways to harness data to answer questions of social and intellectual interests.
It combines tools used in a variety of fields (economics, statistics, machine learning, business) for
a variety of goals (description/visualization, causal evaluation, and prediction with and without
policy changes). This course aims for students to understand and critically discuss:
1) Econometric, statistical, and machine learning methods
2
2) Computational/algorithmic implementations of methods in programming languages (like
Matlab, Python, R, and/or Stata)
3) Key applications (from a variety of domains like brain and cognitive sciences, education,
development, health, industrial organization, labor, linguistics, marketing, politics, public
finance, trade; see the bold questions in the following Roadmap)
Students will understand not only how methods work in theory but will also replicate and extend
empirical applications by working with data by themselves.
Students will finish the course equipped with a workman’s familiarity with the tools of data
science, facility with data handling and statistical programming, and—hopefully—a good
understanding of what questions you want to answer and how best to do it. That’s a lot of ground
to cover, so plan your time accordingly and be prepared to spend many hours every week.