HE2004	INTRODUCTORY ECONOMETRICS
This course helps students to form a foundation in econometric analysis especially those related to modern economic research.
Modern econometric skills will be introduced to students through lectures and computer based class projects. The course emphasizes
applications of econometric techniques rather than econometric theories. Statistical package will be used to illustrate analysis of realworld
data. The main topics covered are: Multiple Regression Analysis (Estimation and Inference), Dummy Variables,
Multicollinearity, Heteroscedasticity, Autocorrelation, Binary Choice Model, Panel Regression, and Baysian Estimation

HE2005	PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMETRICS
Discussions of different estimations of the econometric models, their tests and their applications. Topics include the Simple
Linear Regression Model, Generalized Linear Regression Models, Dummy variable models, dynamic models and
introductory time series models. For each topic, illustrative examples will be employed during the lectures and tutorials.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey (2013), Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach (5th edition)
Chapter 1 The Nature of Econometrics and Economic Data 1
PART 1: Regression Analysis with Cross-Sectional Data 21
Chapter 2 The Simple Regression Model 22
Chapter 3 Multiple Regression Analysis: Estimation 68
Chapter 4 Multiple Regression Analysis: Inference 118
Chapter 5 Multiple Regression Analysis: OLS Asymptotics 168
Chapter 6 Multiple Regression Analysis: Further Issues 186
Chapter 7 Multiple Regression Analysis with Qualitative
Information: Binary (or Dummy) Variables 227
Chapter 8 Heteroskedasticity 268
Chapter 9 More on Specification and Data Issues 303
PART 2: Regression Analysis with Time Series Data 343
Chapter 10 Basic Regression Analysis with Time Series Data 344
Chapter 11 Further Issues in Using OLS with Time Series Data 380
Chapter 12 Serial Correlation and Heteroskedasticity in Time Series Regressions 412
PART 3: Advanced Topics 447
Chapter 13 Pooling Cross Sections Across Time: Simple Panel Data Methods 448
Chapter 14 Advanced Panel Data Methods 484
Chapter 15 Instrumental Variables Estimation and Two Stage Least Squares 512
Chapter 16 Simultaneous Equations Models 554
Chapter 17 Limited Dependent Variable Models and Sample Selection Corrections 583
Chapter 18 Advanced Time Series Topics 632
Chapter 19 Carrying Out an Empirical Project 676


HE4020	ECONOMETRIC TIME SERIES ANALYSIS
This course provides an introduction to econometric time series techniques that are widely used in analyzing economic data. The course will meet the needs of students who plan more advanced studies in this area. Students are instructed on the econometric time series techniques that can be used for empirical economic studies, as well as to analyze financial time series. Topics covered include stationary time-series models, trends and volatility modeling, models for time-varying volatility, univariate processes with unit roots, multiequation time-series models, cointegration and the error-correction models.


Enders W.
Applied Econometric Time Series 
Table of Contents

Chapter 1: Difference Equations

Chapter 2: Stationary Time-Series Models

Chapter 3: Modeling Volatility

Chapter 4: Models with Trend

Chapter 5: Multiequation Time-Series Models

Chapter 6: Cointegration and Error-Correction Models

Chapter 7: Nonlinear Models and Breaks

Index   