ECON1102
Macroeconomics 1
Macroeconomics is concerned with the operation of the economy as a whole, with
attention paid to such things as unemployment, inflation, and interest rates,
determination of the level of national income, savings and investment, and the
exchange rate and the current account of the balance of payments. The course
develops a consistent model of the economy to explore the interactions of key
macroeconomic markets and variables and to examine the impacts of different
kinds of shocks to the economy and the role of government budgetary and
monetary policy in influencing the level of economic activity.

ECON 2102
MACROECONOMICS 2
This course introduces the student to methods and issues in contemporary macroeconomics. A good
understanding of the various macroeconomic issues and models is vital for any student of economics,
business and finance. A central theme is the inter-relationship between empirical macroeconomic
outcomes and theoretical constructs for explaining or understanding these outcomes. These models
can also be used to understand and re-invent macroeconomic policies. In this course we also aim to
bring the themes in undergraduate macroeconomic studies closer to what is taught in graduate
courses, and also closer to how macroeconomics is done in the best universities and policy institutions
such as the U.S. Federal Reserve, the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, Bank
of England, the Reserve Banks of New Zealand and Australia.

Macroeconomics 3
Course Description
This course extends and reinforces the material developed in Macroeconomics 2 by
analysing a number of policy issues in macroeconomics. Its objective is to show how
practical problems can be structured and analysed using macroeconomic models and
appropriate data. Most of the applications will be drawn from contemporary and historical
Australian and international experience. Topics to be discussed include measurement and
interpretation of macroeconomic aggregates; impact of the world economy on short-run
fluctuations in Australia; determinants of economic growth and foreign debt; assessment of
the impact of fiscal policy; inflation targets and monetary policy; and the persistence of
unemployment.