Economics 102 Macroeconomic Theory
is the basic course in macroeconomic theory for undergraduate economics
majors. In contrast to the focus of Economics 2 on policy, Economics 102 is a mathematical
class and is centered on constructing and understanding macroeconomic models.
We will cover models at an abstract and advanced level. You MUST have the degree of
mathematical maturity associated with the concepts of sets, functions, derivatives, integrals,
Taylor series, optimization, ordinary dierential equations, and other material covered in
Math 104 and Math 114/115. STRICT prerequisites for the class is Economics 1, 2, 101,
and one year of calculus. If you do not meet these requirements, you cannot take this class.

This course will be taught from an equilibrium perspective. This means we will
analyze environments in which economic agents optimize and in which aggregate consistency
conditions hold. Understanding the concept of equilibrium will then be the single most
important task of the course.
We will apply this equilibrium insight to discuss the theory of long-run economic growth
and short-run economic uctuations. Growth theory describes and explains how the main
economic aggregates (such as output, employment, ination, interest rates) evolve on average
over long periods of time, whereas theories of short-run uctuations (business cycle theories)
analyze the short-run movements of economic aggregates. Once we have understood how
the macroeconomy works, we can start analyzing macroeconomic policy, in particular scal
policy (what are the macroeconomic eects of taxation, government spending, budget decits,
or surpluses) and monetary policy (what happens if the Federal Reserve Bank increases or
lowers the Federal Funds Rate). By the end of the course you should be able to construct a
critical opinion about economic issues using good economic intuition and knowledge.

Stephen Williamson Macroeconomics
Table of Contents

I. INTRODUCTION AND MEASUREMENT ISSUES

1. Introduction

2. Measurement

3. Business Cycle Measurement


II. A ONE-PERIOD MODEL OF THE MACROECONOMY

4. Consumer and Firm Behavior: The Work—Leisure Decision and Profit Maximization

5. A Closed-Economy One-Period Macroeconomic Model

6. Search and Unemployment


PART III. ECONOMIC GROWTH

7. Economic Growth: Malthus and Solow

8. Income Disparity Among Countries and Endogenous Growth


PART IV. SAVINGS, INVESTMENT, AND GOVERNMENT DEFICITS

9. A Two-Period Model: The Consumption—Savings Decision and Credit Markets

10. Credit Market Imperfections: Credit Frictions, Financial Crises, and Social Security

11. A Real Intertemporal Model with Investment


PART V. MONEY AND BUSINESS CYCLES

12. Money, Banking, Prices, and Monetary Policy

13. Business Cycle Models with Flexible Prices and Wages

14. New Keynesian Economics: Sticky Prices

PART VI. INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMICS

15. International Trade in Goods and Assets

16. Money in the Open Economy

PART VII. MONEY, BANKING, AND INFLATION

17. Money, Inflation, and Banking

18. Inflation, the Phillips Curve, and Central Bank Commitment



Economics 002 Introductory Economics: Macroeconomics
ECON 002 is the first course in macroeconomics for undergraduate students. Macroeconomics studies the aggregate behavior of the economy. In the first part of the course, students will learn how to measure economic performance and the meaning of terms such as GDP, unemployment, and inflation. The main focus of this course will subsequently be the models that attempt to explain the determination of national output. We will examine the long-run growth of national income as well as the short-run fluctuations in national income (i.e., recessions and booms). Throughout the course we will explore how government policies can influence the performance of the economy.

N. Gregory Mankiw: “Principles of Macroeconomics” 
Introduction 1
Chapter 1 The Science of Macroeconomics 3
Chapter 2 The Data of Macroeconomics 17
part II
Classical Theory: The Economy in the
Long Run 43
Chapter 3 National Income: Where It Comes
From and Where It Goes 45
Chapter 4 Money and Inflation 79
Chapter 5 The Open Economy 119
Chapter 6 Unemployment 163
part III
Growth Theory: The Economy in the
Very Long Run 189
Chapter 7 Economic Growth I: Capital
Accumulation and Population
Growth 191
Chapter 8 Economic Growth II: Technology,
Empirics, and Policy 221
part IV
Business Cycle Theory: The Economy
in the Short Run 255
Chapter 9 Introduction to Economic
Fluctuations 257
Chapter 10 Aggregate Demand I: Building the
IS–LM Model 287
Chapter 11 Aggregate Demand II: Applying the
IS–LM Model 311
Chapter 12 The Open Economy Revisited: The
Mundell–Fleming Model and the
Exchange-Rate Regime 339
Chapter 13 Aggregate Supply and the Short-Run
Tradeoff Between Inflation and
Unemployment 379
Chapter 14 A Dynamic Model of Aggregate
Demand and Aggregate Supply 409
part V
Macroeconomic Policy Debates 443
Chapter 15 Stabilization Policy 445
Chapter 16 Government Debt and Budget
Deficits 467
part VI
More on the Microeconomics Behind
Macroeconomics 493
Chapter 17 Consumption 495
Chapter 18 Investment 525
Chapter 19 Money Supply, Money Demand, and
the Banking System 547
Epilogue What We Know, What We Don’t 567




