180.101 Elements of Macroeconomics
An introduction to the economic system and economic analysis, with emphasis on total national income and output, employment,
 the price level and inflation, money, the government budget, the national debt, and interest rates. The role of public policy.
 Applications of economic analysis to government and personal decisions. Prerequisite: basic facility with graphs and algebra.

Instructor: Barbera

Table of Contents

Part 1: Introduction

1. Economics: Foundations and Models

Appendix: Using Graphs and Formulas

2. Trade-offs, Comparative Advantage, and the Market System

3. Where Prices Come From: The Interaction of Demand and Supply

4. Economic Efficiency, Government Price Setting, and Taxes

Appendix: Quantitative Demand and Supply Analysis

5. The Economics of Health Care

Part 2: Firms in the Domestic and International Economies

6. Firms, the Stock Market, and Corporate Governance

Appendix: Tools to Analyze Firms’ Financial Information

7. Comparative Advantage and the Gains from International Trade

Part 3: Macroeconomic Foundations and Long-Run Growth

8. GDP: Measuring Total Production and Income

9. Unemployment and Inflation

10. Economic Growth, the Financial System, and Business Cycles

11. Long-run Economic Growth: Sources and Policies

Part 4: Short-Run Fluctuations

12. Aggregate Expenditure and Output in the Short Run

Appendix: The Algebra of Macroeconomic Equilibrium

13. Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply Analysis

Appendix: Macroeconomic Schools of Thought

Part 5: Monetary and Fiscal Policy

14. Money, Banks, and the Federal Reserve System

15. Monetary Policy

16. Fiscal Policy

Appendix: A Closer Look at the Multiplier

17. Inflation, Unemployment, and Federal Reserve Policy

Part 6: The International Economy

18. Macroeconomics in an Open Economy

19. The International Financial System


Macroeconomics, 6th Edition
R. Glenn Hubbard, Columbia University
Anthony Patrick O'Brien, Lehigh University


180.302 Macroeconomic Theory
The course provides a treatment of macroeconomic theory including a static analysis of the determination of output, employment,
 the price level, the rate of interest, and a dynamic analysis of growth, inflation, and business cycles. In addition,
 the use and effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policy to bring about full employment, price stability, and steady economic growth will be discussed.
 Please see the course Blackboard site for further information.

Prerequisites:

180.101-102 (can be taken concurrently with 180.102) and Differential Calculus 110.106, or permission of instructor.

Instructor: Korinek