This subject covers topics in modern Macroeconomic Theory and Policy at the advanced level. The emphasis will be laid on recent advances in the theories about long-term
growth and short-term business cycle, and in the related empirical and policy debates. The growth theory includes neoclassical growth models (particularly the Ramsey and
overlapping-generations models), and various endogenous growth models with knowledge spillovers, human capital and R&D investment. We also consider income
distribution, convergence, income ranking, and population ageing in the growth models. The business cycle theory includes the real-business cycle model and various New
Keynesian models. The policy issues include national debt, social security, and monetary policies. It helps students understand the frontier debates in macroeconomics.


EC2102 Macroeconomic Analysis I 
This course develops the analytical tools to understand basic questions on short-run macroeconomic fluctuations, and shows how these tools can be applied to real world situations. In the process of developing these tools, we will discuss the determinants of consumption and investment. Next we turn to different business cycle theories. Specifically, we study the Keynesian, New Keynesian, Neo Classical and Real Business Cycle models, and examine their different assumptions and policy prescriptions for macroeconomic stabilization. IS-LM and AD-AS frameworks are employed in studying some or all of these paradigms. Finally, we evaluate the predictions of these models against business cycle facts. We will also briefly review national income accounting and discuss some measurement issues.


Principles of Economics
N. Gregory Mankiw
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part VIII: THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS.
23. Measuring a Nation’s Income.
24. Measuring the Cost of Living.
Part IX: THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN.
25. Production and Growth.
26. Saving, Investment, and the Financial System.
27. Tools of Finance.
28. Unemployment and Its Natural Rate.
Part X: MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN.
29. The Monetary System.
30. Money Growth and Inflation.
Part XI: THE MACROECONOMICS OF OPEN ECONOMICS.
31. Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts.
32. A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy.
Part XII: SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS.
33. Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply.
34. The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand.
35. The Short-Run Tradeoff between Inflation and Unemployment.
Part XIII: FINAL THOUGHTS.
36. Six Debates over Macroeconomic Policy.

EC3102 Macroeconomic Analysis II
This course follows up on Macroeconomics I (EC2102). We review consumption and investment theories, and study the determinants of money demand and supply. Aggregate Supply functions under differing assumptions regarding labour-market clearing and price expectations (rational or adaptive) are derived next, and combined with the Aggregate Demand function to study policy and other effects. We next examine the expectations-augmented Phillips Curve, and simple inflation-unemployment dynamics. We also study further policy issues (time inconsistency, Ricardian Equivalence, profit-sharing), open-economy macroeconomics (the Mundell-Fleming model), and simple growth theory (the Solow model and the AK endogenous growth model).

Macroeconomics by Blanchard and Johnson, 6th Edition.
Introduction  1
Chapter 1 A Tour of the World  3
Chapter 2 A Tour of the Book  19
The Short Run  41
Chapter 3 The Goods Market  43
Chapter 4 Financial Markets  63
Chapter 5 Goods and Financial Markets:
The IS–LM Model  85
The Medium Run  109
Chapter 6 The Labor Market  111
Chapter 7 Putting All Markets Together:
The AS–AD Model  133
Chapter 8 The Phillips Curve, the Natural Rate
of Unemployment, and Inflation  161
Chapter 9 The Crisis  183
The Long Run  205
Chapter 10 The Facts of Growth  207
Chapter 11 Saving, Capital Accumulation,
and Output  225
Chapter 12 Technological Progress and
Growth  249
Chapter 13 Technological Progress: The
Short, the Medium, and the
Long Run  267
EXTENSIONS
Expectations  289
Chapter 14 Expectations: The Basic Tools  291
Chapter 15 Financial Markets and
Expectations  313
Chapter 16 Expectations, Consumption,
and Investment  337
Chapter 17 Expectations, Output,
and Policy  357
The Open Economy  377
Chapter 18 Openness in Goods and Financial
Markets  379
Chapter 19 The Goods Market in an Open
Economy  399
Chapter 20 Output, the Interest Rate, and
the Exchange Rate  423
Chapter 21 Exchange Rate Regimes  445
Back to Policy  471
Chapter 22 Should Policymakers Be
Restrained?  473
Chapter 23 Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  493
Chapter 24 Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  517
Chapter 25 Epilogue: The Story of
Macroeconomics  539
EC4302 Macroeconomic Analysis III
This module is divided into two sections; long- and short- run macro-economic analysis. In the first section, we shall discuss various theories of economic growth using inter-temporal optimization models, which include neo-classical growth models and overlapping-generations models. In the second section, we shall add stochastic elements to the standard neo-classical growth model and use it to study business cycles. Our focus will be to highlight the similarities and differences between the Real Business Cycle and New-Keynesian Models. This course is suitable for students intending to pursue graduate studies or quantitative research (in ministries, statutory boards, etc.) in Economics.

Topics
1.   Preference and Utility
2.   Utility-Maximizing Problem and Its Solution
3.   Utility-Maximizing Problem and Expenditure-Minimizing Problem
4.   Law of Demand, Exchange Economies, Pareto Efficiency
5.   Core and Competitive Equilibrium
6.   Welfare Theorems and Existence of Competitive Equilibrium
7.   Choice under Risk
8.   Externality
9.   Asymmetric Information
10. Modelling Strategic Behaviours I
11. Modelling Strategic Behaviours II
12. Incomplete Information and Efficient Mechanism