14.02 Principles of Macroeconomics
Prereq: None 
U (Fall, Spring) 
3-0-9 units. HASS-S

Provides an overview of macroeconomic issues including the determination of national income, economic growth, unemployment, inflation, interest rates, and exchange rates. Introduces basic macroeconomic models and illustrates key principles through applications to the experience of the US and other economies. Explores a range of current policy debates, such as the economic effects of monetary and fiscal policy, the causes and consequences of the 2008 global financial crisis, and the factors that influence long-term growth in living standards. Lectures are recorded and available for students with scheduling conflicts.
Fall: R. Caballero, M. Beraja 
Spring: J. Poterba

Macroeconomics, 7th Edition
Olivier Blanchard, MIT
Table of Contents

THE CORE

Introduction

1. A Tour of the World  

2. A Tour of the Book

The Short Run  

3. The Goods Market  

4. Financial Markets I

5. Goods and Financial Markets; The IS-LM Model

6. Financial Markets II

The Medium Run

7. The Labor Market

8. The Phillips Curve, the Natural Rate of Unemployment, and Inflation

9. Putting All Markets Together: From the Short to the Medium Run

The Long Run

10. The Facts of Growth

11. Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output

12. Technological Progress and Growth

13. Technological Progress: The Short, the Medium, and the Long Runs

EXTENSIONS

Expectations

14. Financial Markets and Expectations

15. Expectations, Consumption, and Investment

16. Expectations, Output, and Policy

The Open Economy

17. Openness in Goods and Financial Markets

18. The Goods Market in an Open Economy

19. Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate

20. Exchange Rate Regimes

Back to Policy

21. Should Policy Makers Be Restrained?

22. Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up

23. Monetary Policy: A Summing Up

24. Epilogue: The Story of Macroeconomics


14.05 Intermediate Macroeconomics
Prereq: 14.01, 14.02 
U (Spring) 
4-0-8 units. HASS-S


14.06 Advanced Macroeconomics
Prereq: 14.01, 14.02 
U (Spring) 
4-0-8 units. HASS-S

Blends a thorough study of the theoretical foundations of modern macroeconomics with a review of useful mathematical tools, such as dynamic programming, optimal control, and dynamic systems. Develops comfort with formal macroeconomic reasoning and deepens understanding of key macroeconomic phenomena, such as business cycles. Goes on to study more specific topics, such as unemployment, financial crises, and the role of fiscal and monetary policy. Special attention to reviewing relevant facts and disentangling them from their popular interpretations. Uses insights and tools from game theory. Includes applications to recent and historical events.
G. M. Angeletos

