The course provides a detailed introduction to Macroeconomics and encompasses the fundamentals of
Macroeconomics. On completion of the course students will have the ability to critically assess real world
macroeconomic developments at the 1st year undergraduate level. Moreover, students will be able to better
understand the material in other online economics courses such as the ‘New Economic Powers'and
‘Globalisation’.
Listen to Dr Sangaralingam Ramesh talking about the course:

Goodwin, N., Nelson, J.A., and Harris, J., Macroeconomics in Context 2nd edition (M.E. Sharpe, 2014)

CONTENTS   PART ONE The Context for Economic Analysis  Chapter 0: Microeconomics and Well-Being   Chapter 1: Economic Activity in Context 1. Our Starting Point 2. The Goals of an Economy 3. The Issues That Define Economics 4. Economic Tradeoffs 5. Microeconomics in Context   Chapter 2: Markets and Society 1. The Three Spheres of Economic Activity 2. The Role of Markets 3. Types of Markets 4. Advantages and Limitations of Markets   PART TWO Basic Economic Analysis  Chapter 3: Supply and Demand 1. Introduction to the Microeconomic Market Model 2. The Theory of Supply 3. The Theory of Demand 4. The Theory of Market Adjustment 5. Topics in Market Analysis      
 Chapter 4: Elasticity 1. The Price Elasticity of Demand 2. The Price Elasticity of Supply 3. Income Elasticity of Demand 4. Income and Substitution Effects of a Price Change 5. Short-Run Versus Long-Run Elasticity   Chapter 5: Welfare Analysis 1.  Welfare Economics 2.  Consumer Surplus 3. Producer Surplus 4. Social Efficiency 5. Policy Inferences from Welfare Analysis   Chapter 6: International Trade and Trade Policy 1. Trade, Specialization, and Productivity 2. Gains from Trade 3. Drawbacks of Free Trade 4. Globalization and Policy 5. Conclusion Appendix: A Formal Theory of Gains from Trade   PART THREE Economics and Society  Chapter 7: Economic Actors and Economic Behavior 1. Economic Understandings of Human Motivations 2. Economic Behavior 3. Economic Rationality   Chapter 8: Consumption and the Consumer Society 1. Economic Theory and Consumption 2. Consumption in Historical and International Context 3. Consumption in a Social Context 4. Consumption in an Environmental Context 5. Consumption and Well-Being Appendix: A Formal Theory of Consumer Behavior   A1. The Assumptions   A2. The Budget Line and its Slope   A3. Indifference Curves 
  A4. Utility Maximization   A5. Response to Variations in Price Chapter 9: Markets for Labor 1. Labor in the Traditional Neoclassical Model 2. Labor Supply and Demand at the Market Level 3. Changes in Jobs and in the Labor Force 4. Alternative Explanations for Variations in Wages 5.  Wages and Economic Power Appendix: A Formal Model of a Firm’s Hiring Decision   Part Four Essential Topics For Contemporary Economics  Chapter 10: Economic and Social Inequality 1. Defining and Measuring Inequality 2. Data and Trends 3. Causes and Consequences of Inequality 4. Policy Reforms     Chapter 11: Taxes and Tax Policy 1.  Economic Theory and Taxes 2. The Structure of Taxation in the United States 3. Tax Analysis and Policy Issues     Chapter 12: The Economics of the Environment 1. The Theory of Externalities 2. Valuing the Environment 3. Environmental Policies in Practice Appendix: Formal Analysis of Negative Externalities   Chapter 13: Common Property Resources and Public Goods 1. Goods Other Than Private Goods 2. Artificially Scarce Goods 3. Common Property Resources 4. Public Goods 5. Climate Change        
Part Five Resources, Production, And Market Organization  Chapter 14: Capital Stocks and Resource Maintenance 1. Capital Stocks 2. Natural Capital 3. Manufactured Capital 4. Human Capital 5. Social Capital 6. Financial Capital 7. Sustaining Capital Stocks   Chapter 15: Production Costs 1. An Overview of Production 2. Types of Production Costs 3. The Production Function 4. Production Costs     Chapter 16: Markets Without Power 1. Understanding Market Power and Competition 2. Perfect Competition 3. Profit Maximization Under Perfect Competition 4. Losses and Exit 5. Production, Efficiency, and Equity Appendix: A Formal Model of Perfect Competition   Chapter 17: Markets With Market Power 1. The Traditional Models 2. Pure Monopoly: One Seller 3. Monopolistic Competition 4. Oligopoly 5. Imperfect Competition in Agriculture and Health Care 6. Summary and a Final Note Appendix: Formal Analysis of Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition   A1. The Assumptions   A2. Monopoly   A3. Monopolistic 