ECONOMICS 330D1 MACROECONOMIC THEORY (MAJORS)
This course has two main objectives. One of these is for the students to acquire a rigorous understanding of macroeconomic analysis. This will be imparted through the use of verbal arguments, diagrams and high school mathematics. While some knowledge of calculus makes it easier to understand many of the theories in economics, this course will not require such prior knowledge. However, the ability to manipulate simple equations and do other derivations at the level of high school mathematics will be presumed and is essential to doing well in this course.
The second objective of the course is for the students to learn to apply economic analysis to explanations of the macroeconomic aspects of the economy. This requires knowledge of particular aspects of the actual economy, their representation in numerical data and diagrammatic forms, and the ability to interpret the patterns in the data and graphs, so that economic analysis can be used to explain the discerned patterns.

JAGDISH HANDA, MACROECONOMICS, World Scientific Press, 2010.
Introduction to Macroeconomics:
Output, Unemployment, and the Basic Concepts
Money, Prices, Interest Rates, and Fiscal Deficits
Introduction to the Open Economy: Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments
Short-Run Macroeconomics:
Determinants of Aggregate Demand: The Commodity Market of the Closed Economy
Aggregate Demand in the Open Economy Under an Interest Rate Target: IS-IRT Analysis
Aggregate Demand Under a Money Supply Operating Target: IS-LM Analysis
Full-Employment Output and the Natural Rate of Unemployment
Output in the Short Run: The Role of Expectations and Adjustment Costs
Actual Output, Disequilibrium, and the Interaction Among Markets
Employment, Unemployment, and Inflation
Paradigms in Macroeconomics
Topics in Open Economy Macroeconomics:
The Foreign Exchange Market, IMF, and Globalization
The Open Economy Under a Fixed Exchange Rate Regime
Growth Economics:
Classical Growth Theory
Advanced Topics in Growth Theory
Business Cycles, Crises, and The International Transmission of Economic Activity

Macroeconomic Analysis & Applications ECON 209
The course aims to introduce students to the major issues facing the world's economies, to the
methods that economists use to study those issues, and to the policy problems that those issues
create. The goal is to give students a sucient understanding of the denition and determinants
of aggregate variables in the economy. Topics include: introduction and preliminaries; GDP and
national accounts; the basic macroeconomic model; money; ination; unemployment; scal and
monetary policy; trade policy; nancial crisis and recession. The course assumes that students
have taken ECON208 or equivalent.
Economics (15th Canadian Edition) by C. Ragan, published by Pearson Education Canada.
Part One:  What Is Economics?
1: Economic Issues and Concepts
2: Economic Theories, Data, and Graphs
Part Two:  An Introduction to Demand and Supply
3: Demand, Supply, and Price
Part Seven:  An Introduction to Macroeconomics    
19: What Macroeconomics Is All About    
20: The Measurement of National Income    
Part Eight:  The Economy in the Short Run    
21: The Simplest Short-Run Macro Model
22: Adding Government and Trade to the Simple Macro Model
23: Output and Prices in the Short Run    
Part Nine:  The Economy in the Long Run    
24: From the Short Run to the Long Run: The Adjustment of Factor Prices
25: Long-Run Economic Growth    
Part Ten:  Money, Banking, and Monetary Policy    
26: Money and Banking
27: Money, Interest Rates, and Economic Activity
28: Monetary Policy in Canada    
Part Eleven:  Macroeconomic Problems and Policies   
29: Inflation and Disinflation
30: Unemployment Fluctuations and the NAIRU
31: Government Debt and Deficits
Part Twelve:  Canada in the Global Economy
32: The Gains from International Trade
33: Trade Policy
34: Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments


Macroeconomic TheoryECON 330D1-002
The objective of this course is to make you familiar with the modern day tools and methods
of macroeconomics. Macroeconomics is a vast eld, and it is not possible to summarize it
in its entirety in a single course. It is my hope, however, that by the end of this course, you
will be able to:
1. Understand and critically assess macroeconomic policies implemented by policy makers
and governments. Such analyses would involve weighing the costs and benets of
policies.
2. Start thinking like a macroeconomist! For instance, this would entail going above and
beyond a layperson's understanding of economic issues. In economics, there is generally
no single right answer. One should generally refrain from making blanket statements



Econ 209 section 004, Macroeconomic Analysis and Applications
The course is intended to equip students with basic knowledge in Macroeconomics. We will go
over basic concepts and notions in macroeconomics and will see several practical applications of
the theory. This will help you to understand how macroeconomic variables are related to each
other and how they interact as well as how government policy intervention can affect economic
performance. This course does not have calculus requirement though knowing it is always an
asset.
Chapter 19: What Macroeconomics Is All About
Chapter 20: The Measurement of National Income
Part Eight: The Economy in the Short Run
Chapter 21: The Simplest Short-Run Macro Model
Chapter 22: Adding Government and Trade to the Simple Macro Model
Chapter 23: Output and Prices in the Short Run
Part Nine: The Economy in the Long Run
Chapter 24: From the Short Run to the Long Run: The Adjustment of Factor Prices
Chapter 25: The Difference Between Short-Run and Long-Run Macroeconomics
Chapter 26: Long-Run Economic Growth
Part Ten: Money, Banking, and Monetary Policy
Chapter 27: Money and Banking
Chapter 28: Money, Interest Rates, and Economic Activity
Chapter 29: Monetary Policy in Canada
Part Eleven: Macroeconomic Problems and Policies
Chapter 30: Inflation and Disinflation
Chapter 31: Unemployment Fluctuations and the NAIRU
Chapter 32: Government Debt and Deficits
Part Twelve: Canada in the Global Economy
Chapter 33: The Gains from International Trade
Chapter 34: Trade Policy
Chapter 35: Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments
Chapter 36: Challenges Facing the Developing Countries
