ECON 19900. Introduction to Macroeconomics. 100 Units.
By way of theory and public policy applications, this course covers current major domestic and
international macroeconomic issues in the U.S. economy, including the determination of income and
output, inflation, unemployment, and economic growth; money, banking, and the Federal Reserve
System; federal spending, taxation, and deficits; and international trade, exchange rates, and the
balance of payments.
Instructor(s): A. Sanderson Terms Offered: Autumn, Winter
Principles of Economics
N. Gregory Mankiw

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Part VIII: THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS.
23. Measuring a Nation’s Income.
24. Measuring the Cost of Living.
Part IX: THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN.
25. Production and Growth.
26. Saving, Investment, and the Financial System.
27. Tools of Finance.
28. Unemployment and Its Natural Rate.
Part X: MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN.
29. The Monetary System.
30. Money Growth and Inflation.
Part XI: THE MACROECONOMICS OF OPEN ECONOMICS.
31. Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts.
32. A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy.
Part XII: SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS.
33. Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply.
34. The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand.
35. The Short-Run Tradeoff between Inflation and Unemployment.
Part XIII: FINAL THOUGHTS.
36. Six Debates over Macroeconomic Policy.


ECON 23200. Topics in Macroeconomics. 100 Units.
This course focuses on the use of dynamic general equilibrium models to study questions in
macroeconomics. Topics include long-run growth and dynamic fiscal policy (Ricardian equivalence, tax
smoothing, capital taxation), labor market search, industry investment, and asset pricing. On the
technical side, we cover basic optimal control (Hamiltonians) and dynamic programming (Bellman
equations).
Instructor(s): N. Stokey Terms Offered: TBD
Prerequisite(s): ECON 20200 (or ECON 20210 ) and MATH 20300
ECON 23220. Introduction to Advanced Macroeconomic Analysis. 100 Units.
This course introduces students to advanced methods for macroeconomic analysis. In the first part, we
discuss time series methods such as impulse response analysis, vector autoregression, co-integration,
shock identification, and business cycle detrending. In the second part, we examine and analyze a
simple, yet powerful stochastic dynamic real business cycle model. In that context, the students will
learn about dynamic programming, rational expectations, intertemporal optimization, asset pricing, the
Frisch elasticity of labor supply, log-linearization, and computational tools to solve for the recursive law
of motion of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. Finally, we touch upon some further
models, such as the overlapping generations model and/or the continuous-time neoclassical growth
model. The course is useful for students interested to deepen their knowledge in macroeconomics, in
order to read, understand, and replicate some of the recent research in the field; as preparation for
careers involving macroeconomic analysis, time series analysis, or asset pricing; or as preparation for
graduate school. Decent knowledge of linear algebra and calculus is required. All advanced material will
be taught in class.
Instructor(s): H. Uhlig Terms Offered: Winter
Prerequisite(s): ECON 20200 (or ECON 20210 ) and ECON 21020 (or ECON 21030)