ECON 100A Economic Analysis--Micro
Resource allocation and price determination.

Austan Goolsbee, Steven Levitt, and Chad Syverson.  (2016).  Microeconomics, 2nd Edition
Chapter 1: Adventures in Microeconomics
Chapter 2: Supply and Demand
Chapter 3: Using Supply and Demand to Analyze Markets
Chapter 4: Consumer Behavior
Chapter 5: Individual and Market Demand
Chapter 6: Producer Behavior
Chapter 7: Costs
Chapter 8: Supply in a Competitive Market
Chapter 9: Market Power and Monopoly
Chapter 10: Market Power and Pricing Strategies
Chapter 11: Imperfect Competition
Chapter 12: Game Theory
Chapter 13: Factor Markets
Chapter 14: Investment, Time, and Insurance
Chapter 15: General Equilibrium
Chapter 16: Asymmetric Information
Chapter 17: Externalities and Public Goods
Chapter 18: Behavioral and Experimental Economics


ECON 101A Economic Theory--Micro 
Theory of resource allocation and price determination with an emphasis on microeconomic principles.
ECON 104 Advanced Microeconomic Theory 
This course explores some issues in advanced microeconomic theory, with special emphasis on game-theoretic models and the theory of choice under uncertainty. Specific applications will vary from year to year, but will generally include topics from information economics and models of strategic interaction.
This is an advanced undergraduate microeconomic theory course.  It will cover topics that were
not covered in Econ 101A or were covered only in limited fashion.  The level of rigor will
resemble and exceed that of Econ 101A.  This class will help you prepare for graduate school in
economics, but it is not a graduate course.  As such, the mathematical treatment will not be as
formal as a graduate micro course.  The course will focus on the analytical tools of modern
microeconomics – especially game theory and information economics – and will apply these
tools mostly to problems related to industrial organization, e.g., imperfect competition,
auctions, contracts, price discrimination, etc.  I hope it will be a fun and exciting journey
through some of the most interesting topics in modern economics


ECON 230C Public Sector Microeconomics
The economic and policy analysis of government expenditures, taxes, and intergovernmental fiscal relations.
ECON C270A Microeconomics of Development
Theoretical and empirical analyses of poverty and inequality, household and community behavior, and contract and institutions in the context of developing countries.