ECON E-10a (Principles of Economics)
Course Objectives: The main objectives of the course are:
 Explain and analyze the role of markets, government, and other institutions in our lives
 Study the economic principles that attempt to elucidate the complex choices that households, businesses, and societies make in their pursuit of happiness and greater common good
 Critically examine the role of government policies in achieving greatest common good both at micro and macro levels
 Learn about the tools and methodologies that economists use as social scientists to arrive at economic theories.


Economics, 5th Edition
R. Glenn Hubbard, Columbia University
Anthony Patrick O'Brien, Lehigh University
Table of Contents

Part 1: Introduction

1. Economics: Foundations and Models

Appendix: Using Graphs and Formulas
2: Trade-offs, Comparative Advantage, and the Market System

3. Where Prices Come From: The Interaction of Demand and Supply

4. Economic Efficiency, Government Price Setting, and Taxes

Appendix: Quantitative Demand and Supply Analysis

Part 2: Markets in Action: Policy and Applications

5. Externalities, Environmental Policy, and Public Goods

6. Elasticity: The Responsiveness of Demand and Supply

7. The Economics of Health Care

Part 3: Firms in the Domestic and International Economies

8. Firms, the Stock Market, and Corporate Governance

Appendix: Tools to Analyze Firms’ Financial Information

9. Comparative Advantage and the Gains from International Trade

Part 4: Microeconomic Foundations: Consumers and Firms

10. Consumer Choice and Behavioral Economics

Appendix: Using Indifference Curves and Budget Lines to Understand Consumer Behavior

11: Technology, Production, and Costs

Appendix: Using Isoquants and Isocost Lines to Understand Production and Cost

Part 5: Market Structure and Firm Strategy

12. Firms in Perfectly Competitive Markets

13. Monopolistic Competition: The Competitive Model in a More Realistic Setting

14. Oligopoly: Firms in Less Competitive Markets

15. Monopoly and Antitrust Policy

16. Pricing Strategy

Part 6: Labor Markets, Public Choice, and the Distribution of Income

17. The Markets for Labor and Other Factors of Production

18. Public Choice, Taxes, and the Distribution of Income

Part 7: Macroeconomic Foundations and Long-Run Growth

19. GDP: Measuring Total Production and Income

20. Unemployment and Inflation

21. Economic Growth, the Financial System, and Business Cycles

22. Long-Run Economic Growth: Sources and Policies

Part 8: Short-Run Fluctuations

23. Aggregate Expenditure and Output in the Short Run

Appendix: The Algebra of Macroeconomic Equilibrium

24. Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply Analysis

Appendix: Macroeconomic Schools of Thought

Part 9: Monetary and Fiscal Policy

25: Money, Banks, and the Federal Reserve System

26: Monetary Policy

27: Fiscal Policy

Appendix: A Closer Look at the Multiplier

28: Inflation, Unemployment, and Federal Reserve Policy

Part 10: The International Economy

29: Macroeconomics in an Open Economy

30: The International Financial System

Appendix: The Gold Standard and the Bretton Woods System