14.01 Principles of Microeconomics
Prereq: None 
U (Fall, Spring) 
3-0-9 units. HASS-S

Introduces microeconomic concepts and analysis, supply and demand analysis, theories of the firm and individual behavior, competition and monopoly, and welfare economics. Applications to problems of current economic policy. Taught in two formats - lecture/recitation and recitation only - each with 3 sessions per week. Same content and exams.
Fall: J. Gruber 
Spring: J. Harris


Perloff, Jeffrey M. Microeconomics. 5th ed. Addison Wesley, 2008.
Brief Contents
Preface xiv
Chapter 1 Introduction 1
Chapter 2 Supply and Demand 9
Chapter 3 Applying the Supply-and-Demand Model 42
Chapter 4 Consumer Choice 73
Chapter 5 Applying Consumer Theory 111
Chapter 6 Firms and Production 151
Chapter 7 Costs 184
Chapter 8 Competitive Firms and Markets 226
Chapter 9 Applying the Competitive Model 270
Chapter 10 General Equilibrium and Economic Welfare 316
Chapter 11 Monopoly 353
Chapter 12 Pricing and Advertising 394
Chapter 13 Oligopoly and Monopolistic Competition 436
Chapter 14 Game Theory 482
Chapter 15 Factor Markets 517
Chapter 16 Interest Rates, Investments, and Capital Markets 542
Chapter 17 Uncertainty 573
Chapter 18 Externalities, Open-Access, and Public Goods 605
Chapter 19 Asymmetric Information 637
Chapter 20 Contracts and Moral Hazards 666
Chapter Appendixes A-1
Answers to Selected Questions and Problems A-28
Sources for Applications A-44
References A-52
Index A-60
Credits A-78


14.04 Intermediate Microeconomic Theory
Prereq: 14.01, Calculus II (GIR) 
U (Fall) 
4-0-8 units. HASS-S
Varian, Hal R. Intermediate Microeconomics: A Modern Approach. 7th ed. New York, NY: W.W. Norton, 2005. ISBN: 9780393927023. The 6th edition may also be used.
Contents

1. The Market

2. Budget Constraint

3. Preferences

4. Utility

5. Choice

6. Demand

7. Revealed Preference

8. Slutsky Equation

9. Buying and Selling

10. Intertemporal Choice

11. Asset Markets

12. Uncertainty

13. Risky Assets

14. Consumer’s Surplus

15. Market Demand

16. Equilibrium

17. Econometrics

18. Auctions

19. Technology

20. Profit Maximization

21. Cost Minimization

22. Cost Curves

23. Firm Supply

24. Industry Supply

25. Monopoly

26. Monopoly Behavior

27. Factor Markets

28. Oligopoly

29. Game Theory

30. Game Applications

31. Behavioral Economics

32. Exchange

33. Production

34. Welfare

35. Externalities

36. Information Technology

37. Public Goods

38. Asymmetric Information

Mathematical Appendix



Analysis of consumer and producer decisions including analysis of competitive and monopolistic markets. Price-based partial and general equilibrium analysis. Introduction to game theory as a foundation for the strategic analysis of economic situations. Imperfect competition, dynamic games among firms. Failures of general equilibrium theory and their resolutions: externalities, public goods, incomplete information settings, signaling, screening, insurance, alternative market mechanisms, auctions, design of markets.
J. Toikka

14.03 Microeconomic Theory and Public Policy
Subject meets with 14.003 
Prereq: 14.01 or permission of instructor 
U (Fall, Spring) 
4-0-8 units. HASS-S

Applies microeconomic theory to analysis of public policy. Builds from microeconomic model of consumer behavior; extends to operation of single and multiple markets and analysis of why markets sometimes fail. Empirical examples to evaluate theory, focusing on the casual effects of policy interventions on economic outcomes. Topics include minimum wages and employment, food stamps and consumer welfare, economics of risk and safety regulation, the value of education, and gains from international trade.
Fall: D. Autor 
Spring: N. Agarwal

14.121 Microeconomic Theory I
Prereq: 14.04, permission of instructor 
G (Fall; first half of term) 
3-0-3 units

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Dennis Whinston, and Jerry R. Green. Microeconomic Theory. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press, 1995. ISBN: 9780195073409.
Part I: INDIVIDUAL DECISION-MAKING
Introduction to Part I
1. Preference and Choice
A. Introduction
B. Preference Relations
C. Choice Rules
D. The Relationship between Preference Relations and Choice Rules
Exercises
2. Consumer Choice
A. Introduction
B. Commodities
C. The Consumption Set
D. Competitive Budgets
E. Demand Functions and Comparartive Statics
F. The Weak Axiom of Revealed Preference and the Law of Demand
Exercises
3. Classical Demand Theory
A. Introduction
B. Preference Relations: Basic Properties
C. Preference and Utility
D. The Utility Maximization Problem
E. The Expenditure Minimization Problem
F. Duality: A Mathematical Introduction
G. Relationships between Demand, Indirect Utility, and Expenditure Functions
H. Integrability
I. Welfare Evaluation of Economic Changes
J. The Strong Axiom of Revealed Preference
Appendix: Continuity and Differentiability Properties of Walrasian Demand
Exercises
4. Aggregate Demand
A. Introduction
B. Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Wealth
C. Aggregate Demand and the Weak Axiom
D. Aggregate Demand and the Existence of a Representative Consumer
Appendix: Regularizing Effects of Aggregation
Exercises
5. Production
A. Introduction
B. Production Sets
C. Profit Maximization and Cost Minimization
D. The Geometry of Cost and Supply in the Single Output Case
E. Aggregation
F. Efficient Production
G. Remarks on the Objectives of the Firm
Appendix: The Linear Activity Model
Exercises
6. Choice under Uncertainty
A. Introduction
B. Expected Utility Theory
C. Money Lotteries and Risk Aversion
D. Comparison of Payoff Distributions in Terms of Return and Risk
E. State Dependent Utility
F. Subjective Probability Theory
Exercises
Part II: GAME THEORY
Introduction to Part II
7. Basic Elements of Non-Cooperative Games
A. Introduction
B. What is a Game?
C. The Extensive Form Representation of a Game
D. Strategies and the Normal Form Representation of a Game
E. Randomized Choices
Exercises
8. Simultaneous-Move Games
A. Introduction
B. Dominant and Dominated Strategies
C. Rationalizable Strategies
D. Nash Equilibrium
E. Games of Incomplete Information: Bayesian Nash Equilibrium
F. The Possibility of Mistakes: Trembling-Hand Perfection
Appendix: Existence of Nash Equilibrium
Exercises
9. Dynamic Games
A. Introduction
B. Sequential Rationality, Backwards Induction, and Subgame Perfection
C. Sequential Rationality and Out-of-Equilibrium Beliefs
D. Reasonable Beliefs, Forward Induction, and Normal Form Refinements
Appendix A: Finite and Infinite Horizon Bilateral Bargaining
Appendix B: Extensive Form Trembling-Hand Perfection
Exercises
Part III: MARKET EQUILIBRIUM AND MARKET FAILURE
Introduction to Part III
10. Competitive Markets
A. Introduction
B. Pareto Optimality and Competitive Equilibria
C. Partial Equilibrium Competitive Analysis
D. The Fundamental Welfare Theorems in a Partial Equilibrium Context
E. Welfare Analysis in the Partial Equilibrium Model
F. Free-Entry and Long-Run Competitive Equilibria
G. Concluding Remarks on Partial Equilibrium Analysis
Exercises
11. Externalities and Public Goods
A. Introduction
B. A Simple Bilateral Externality
C. Public Goods
D. Multilateral Externalities
E. Private Information and Second-Best Solutions
Appendix: Non-Convexities and the Theory of Externalities
Exercises
12. Market Power
A. Introduction
B. Monopoly Pricing
C. Static Models of Oligopoly
D. Repeated Interaction
E. Entry
F. The Competitive Limit
G. Strategic Precommitments to Affect Future Competition
Appendix A: Infinitely Repeated Games and the Folk Theorem
Appendix B: Strategic Entry Deterrence and Accommodation
Exercises
13. Adverse Selection, Signalling, and Screening
A. Introduction
B. Informational Asymmetries and Adverse Selection
C. Signalling
D. Screening
Appendix: Reasonable-Beliefs Refinements in Signalling Games
Exercises
14. The Principal-Agent Problem
A. Introduction
B. Hidden Actions (Moral Hazard)
C. Hidden Information (and Monopolistic Screening)
D. Hidden Actions and Hidden Information: Hybrid Models
Appendix A: Multiple Effort Levels in the Hidden Action Model
Appendix B: A Formal Solution of the Principal-Agent Problem with Hidden Information
Exercises
Part IV: GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Introduction to Part IV
15. General Equilibrium Theory: Some Examples
A. Introduction
B. Pure Exchange: The Edgeworth Box
C. The One Consumer-One Producer Economy
D. The 2x2 Production Model
E. General versus Partial Equilibrium Theory
Exercises
16. Equilibrium and Its Basic Welfare Properties
A. Introduction
B. The Basic Model and Definitions
C. The First Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics
D. The Second Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics
E. Pareto Optimality and Social Welfare Optima
F. First-Order Conditions for Pareto Optimality
G. Some Applications
Appendix: Technical Properties of the Set of Feasible Allocations
Exercises
17. The Positive Theory of Equilibrium
A. Introduction
B. Equilibrium: Definitions and Basic Equations
C. Existence of Walrasian Equilibrium
D. Local Uniqueness and the Index Theorem
E. Anything Goes: The Sonnenschein-Mantel-Debreu Theorem
F. Uniqueness of Equilibria
G. Comparative Statics Analysis
H. Tatonnement Stability
I. Large Economies and Non-Convexities
Appendix A: Characterizing Equilibrium through Welfare Equations
Appendix B: A General Approach to the Existence of Walrasian Equilibrium
Exercises
18. Some Foundations for Competitive Equilibria
A. Introduction
B. Core and Equilibria
C. Non-Cooperative Foundations of Walrasian Equilibria
D. The Limits to Redistribution
E. Equilibrium and the Marginal Productivity Principle
Appendix: Cooperative Game Theory
Exercises
19. General Equilibrium under Uncertainty
A. Introduction
B. A Market Economy with Contingent Commodities: Description
C. Arrow-Debreu Equilibrium
D. Sequential Trade
E. Asset Markets
F. Incomplete Markets
G. Firm Behavior in General Equilibrium Models under Uncertainty
H. Imperfect Information
Exercises
20. Equilibrium and Time
A. Introduction
B. Intertemporal Utility
C. Intertemporal Production and Efficiency
D. Equilibrium: The One-Consumer Case
E. Stationary Programs, Interest Rates, and Golden Rules
F. Dynamics
G. Equilibrium: Several Consumers
H. Overlapping Generations
I. Remarks on Non-Equilibrium Dynamics: Tatonnement and Learning
Exercises
Part V: WELFARE ECONOMICS AND INCENTIVES
Introduction to Part V
21. Social Choice Theory
A. Introduction
B. A Special Case: Social Preferences over Two Alternatives
C. The General Case: Arrow's Impossibility Theorem
D. Some Possibility Results: Restricted Domains
E. Social Choice Functions
Exercises
22. Elements of Welfare Economics and Axiomatic Bargaining
A. Introduction
B. Utility Possibility Sets
C. Social Welfare Functions and Social Optima
D. Invariance Properties of Social Welfare Functions
E. The Axiomatic Bargaining Approach
F. Coalitional Bargaining: The Shapley Value
Exercises
23. Incentives and Mechanism Design
A. Introduction
B. The Mechanism Design Problem
C. Dominant Strategy Implementation
D. Bayesian Implementation
E. Participation Constraints
F. Optimal Bayesian Mechanisms
Appendix A: Implementation and Multiple Equilibria
Appendix B: Implementation in Environments with Complete Information
Exercises


Covers consumer and producer theory, markets and competition, general equilibrium and the welfare theorems; featuring applications, uncertainty, identification and restrictions models place on data. Enrollment limited; preference to PhD students.
R. Townsend

14.122 Microeconomic Theory II
Prereq: 14.121, permission of instructor 
G (Fall; second half of term) 
3-0-3 units

Introduction to game theory. Topics include normal form and extensive form games, and games with incomplete information. Enrollment limited.
M. Yildiz


14.124 Microeconomic Theory IV
Prereq: 14.123 or permission of instructor 
G (Spring; second half of term) 
3-0-3 units

Introduction to statistical decision theory, incentive contracting (moral hazard and adverse selection), mechanism design and incomplete contracting. Enrollment limited.
B. Holmstrom

