Econ 1101
MICROECONOMICS 1


The course examines how individuals and firms make decisions by weighing up costs
and benefits, and how the interaction of their decisions leads to market and social
outcomes. The model of market supply and demand is employed to examine the effects
of taxes, subsidies, and other government interventions in market activity. The
implications of different market structures, including perfect competition and monopoly,
are examined. Public goods, externalities and common resources are key examples of
cases in which private markets may yield social sub-optimal outcomes. Such cases are
examined the role of government policy in correcting for these is discussed.

Principles of Microeconomics: Australia and New Zealand Edition. Joshua Gans, Stephen
King, Martin Byford and N. Gregory Mankiw
Part I: Introduction
1. Ten lessons from economics
2. Thinking like an economist
3. Interdependence and the gains from trade

Part I: Supply and demand I: how markets work
4. The market forces of supply and demand
5. Elasticity and its application
6. Supply, demand and government policies

Part III: Supply and demand II: markets and welfare
7. Consumers, producers and the efficiency of markets
8. Application: the costs of taxation
9. Application: international trade

Part IV: The economics of the public sector
10. Externalities
11. Public goods and common resources
12. The design of the tax system

Part V: Firm behaviour and the organisation of industry
13. The costs of production
14. Firms in competitive markets
15. Monopoly
16. Business strategy
17. Competition policy
18. Monopolistic competition

Part VI: The economics of labour markets
19. The markets for the factors of production
20. Earnings, unions and discrimination
21. Income inequality and poverty

Part VII: Topics for further study
22. The theory of consumer choice
23. Frontiers of microeconomics



ECON2101
Microeconomics 2

Building upon material introduced in Microeconomics 1, this course aims to provide a solid
understanding of basic microeconomic theory and the ability to apply those tools and ideas. Models
describing the economic behaviour of individual decision-makers and the outcomes of markets are
developed and applied to examine the welfare of market participants. Questions addressed include:
What influences consumer demand decisions and how? How do firms decide on how much to produce
and how much inputs to use? How do prices function to coordinate economic activity? What is meant
by economic efficiency? When do markets fail to achieve efficient outcomes? Training in economic
analysis is achieved via weekly tutorials that go over problem sets linked to material presented in
lectures. Overall, the course takes an analytical approach emphasising rigorous logical reasoning and
economic problem solving.

Nicholson, W., & Snyder, C., 2015, Intermediate Microeconomics and its Applications, 12th edition,
Cengage Learning, USA.

Part I: INTRODUCTION.
1. Economic Models.
Appendix: Mathematics Used in Microeconomics.
Part II: DEMAND.
2. Utility and Choice.
3. Demand Curves.
Part III: UNCERTAINTY AND STRATEGY.
4. Uncertainty.
5. Game Theory.
Part IV: PRODUCTION, COSTS, AND SUPPLY.
6. Production.
7. Costs.
8. Profit Maximization and Supply.
Part V: PERFECT COMPETITION.
9. Perfect Competition in a Single Market.
10. General Equilibrium and Welfare.
Part VI: MARKET POWER.
11. Monopoly.
12. Imperfect Competition.
Part VII: INPUT MARKETS.
13. Pricing in Input Markets.
Appendix: Labor Supply.
14. Capital and Time.
Appendix: Compound Interest.
Part VIII: MARKET FAILURES.
15. Asymmetric Information.
16. Externalities and Public Goods.
17. Behavioral Economics.

