ECON 208 Microeconomic Analysis and Applications
Course Objectives:
This course provides an understanding of the basic principles of microeconomics and their use in
analyzing contemporary economic issues. It begins with an introduction to the methodology of
economics and continues with an analysis of demand and supply. Interactions among markets, elasticity
and consumer behaviour are also discussed. A theory of the firm is presented, together with
considerations regarding the influence of market structure on firm behaviour. Market failures,
government intervention and the general theory of welfare economics are considered. We also analyse
the role of financial markets as a source of funds for firms, and as a link between households and firms.
Microeconomics, 15th Canadian Edition, by Christopher Ragan
Part One:  What Is Economics?
1: Economic Issues and Concepts
2: Economic Theories, Data, and Graphs
 
Part Two:  An Introduction to Demand and Supply
3: Demand, Supply, and Price
4: Elasticity
5: Price Controls and Market Efficiency
 
Part Three:  Consumers and Producers
6: Consumer Behaviour
7: Producers in the Short Run
8: Producers in the Long Run
 
Part Four:  Market Structure and Efficiency
9: Competitive Markets
10: Monopoly, Cartels, and Price Discrimination
11: Imperfect Competition and Strategic Behaviour
12: Economic Efficiency and Public Policy
 
Part Five:  Factor Markets    
13: How Factor Markets Work    
14: Labour Markets and Income Inequality    
15: Interest Rates and the Capital Market
 
Part Six: Government in the Market Economy    
16: Market Failures and Government Intervention    
17: The Economics of Environmental Protection    
18: Taxation and Public Expenditure    
 
Part Twelve:  Canada in the Global Economy
32: The Gains from International Trade
33: Trade Policy
34: Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments


Econ 230, Microeconomics
The course is intended to equip students with knowledge in Microeconomics.
We will go over basic concepts and notions in microeconomics and will see several practical
applications of the theory. This will help you to understand the principles of market economy,
the concepts of supply and demand. We will study the rational consumer’s consumption choice
and profit-maximizing producer’s production choice to identify what lies behind the demand and
the supply in the market. We will briefly touch on efficiency of the market based economics and
how one may study the effects of government interventions on the efficiency of the system and
the welfare of the people.

Part One: An Introduction to Demand and Supply
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Supply and Demand
Chapter 3: Applying Supply-and-Demand model
Part Two: Consumers
Chapter 4: Consumer Choice
Chapter 5: Applying Consumer Theory
Decision Making Under Uncertainty
Part Three: Producers
Chapter 6: Firms and Production
Chapter 7: Costs
Chapter 8: Competitive Firms and Market
Part Five: Factor Markets
Chapter 9: Applying Competitive Model
Chapter 14: General Equilibrium and Economic Welfare

Microeconomic Theory (ECON230D1-001)
Course Overview: This course is designed to provide the fundamental principles of
microeconomic analysis. Topics include the behavior of consumers, the theory of
production and cost curves, the theory of the firm, welfare economics, and the theory of
general equilibrium. Students will learn to use calculus based techniques and methods to
solve standard problems in microeconomic theory.
Jeffrey M. Perloff: Microeconomics

1. Introduction 
2. Supply and Demand 
3. A Consumer’s Constrained Choice 
4. Demand 
5. Consumer Welfare and Policy Analysis 
6. Firms and Production 
7. Costs 
8. Competitive Firms and Markets 
9. Properties and Applications of the Competitive Model 
10. General Equilibrium and Economic Welfare 
11. Monopoly and Monopsony 
12. Pricing and Advertising 
13. Game Theory 
14. Oligopoly and Monopolistic Competition 
15. Factor Markets 
16. Uncertainty 
17. Property Rights, Externalities, Rivalry, and Exclusion 
18. Asymmetric Information 
19. Contracts and Moral Hazards 
Answers to Selected Questions and Problems 
Definitions 
References 
Sources for Challenges and Applications 

Econ208: Microeconomic Analysis & Applications
This 3-credit Microeconomics course focuses on the behaviour of individual economic units (individual markets, individual consumers, and individual firms). It examines the choices that consumers and firms face, how different market structures respond to these choices, and when/how/why government intervention may or may not be desirable for society as a whole. At each stage you will do some theory and then use it for a variety of applications. I hope you will be surprised to find that some things you think seem obvious in everyday life turn out to be anything but! The course assumes you have no prior knowledge of economics.
