ECON 19800 Introduction to Microeconomics
 Course Description:
The course treats by way of economic theory, applications, and contemporary issues:
behavior and decision making on the part of individuals, business firms, and government; and
the role of choices, tradeoffs, costs, prices, incentives and markets in the American economy.

ECON 21100. Microeconometrics. 100 Units.
This course provides students with a basic understanding of how econometrics, economic theory, and
knowledge of institutions can be used to draw credible inferences on economic relationships. Topics
include multivariate linear regression, causal inference, omitted variables bias, fixed and random effects
models, simultaneous equation models, the propensity score, and discrete choice models. Students
have the opportunity to apply these techniques to empirical questions in industrial organization, as well
as in environmental, labor, and public economics.
Instructor(s): Staff Terms Offered: TBD
Prerequisite(s): ECON 21020 or ECON 2 1030
ECON 21110. Applied Microeconometrics. 100 Units.
This course will cover a broad set of applications in labor economics, public economics, industrial
organization, economics of education, environmental economics, and development economics. There
will be a strong focus on how economic theory, institutional details, and experiments can be used to
draw causal inferences on economic relationships. There will be emphasis on applying a number of
commonly used microeconometric methods to economic data; including the linear regression model,
fixed and random effects models, instrumental variables, and discrete choice models. When interpreting
the empirical results, we will also discuss the importance of omitted variables bias and measurement
error.
Instructor(s): J. Joensen Terms Offered: Spring
Prerequisite(s): ECON 20900 or ECON 21000

Principles of Economics
N. Gregory Mankiw

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Part I: INTRODUCTION.
1. Ten Principles of Economics.
2. Thinking Like an Economist.
3. Interdependence and the Gains from Trade.
Part II: HOW MARKETS WORK.
4. The Market Forces of Supply and Demand.
5. Elasticity and Its Application.
6. Supply, Demand, and Government Policies.
Part III: MARKETS AND WELFARE.
7. Consumers, Producers, and the Efficiency of Markets.
8. Applications: The Costs of Taxation.
9. Application: International Trade.
Part IV: THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR.
10. Externalities.
11. Public Goods and Common Resources.
12. The Design of the Tax System.
Part V: FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY.
13. The Costs of Production.
14. Firms in Competitive Markets.
15. Monopoly.
16. Monopolistic Competition.
17. Oligopoly.
Part VI: THE ECONOMICS OF THE LABOR MARKET.
18. The Markets for the Factors of Production.
19. Earnings and Discrimination.
20. Income Inequality and Poverty.
Part VII: TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY.
21. The Theory of Consumer Choice.
22. Frontiers in Microeconomics.
