Essentials of Econometrics (ECNM10052)
Summary 
Essentials of Econometrics provides an introduction to
econometric theory and practice for advanced
undergraduate students who have completed courses in
probability and statistics, microeconomics and
macroeconomics. EE aims to ensure that all economics
honours students have a sound grasp of the basic
techniques of modern empirical economics.

Course
description

Essentials of Econometrics (EE) provides an opportunity
to learn skills that are important for later stages of the
Economics programme, and many future career and life
contexts. EE aims to ensure that all economics honours
students have a sound grasp of the basic techniques of
modern empirical economics.
The topics covered are likely to include: statistics
(review of probability distributions, statistical
inference, estimation and hypothesis testing); the
linear regression model (two-variable model, multiple
regression, functional forms, dummy variables);
regression analysis in practice (model selection criteria
and tests, multicollinearity, heteroskedasticity,
autocorrelation).
EE includes weekly lab sessions to reinforce lectures,
with exercises which foster 'learning-by-doing'. The
course provides an opportunity to develop and practice
key practical skills in computing, data gathering,
processing, analysis and presentation.


Learning Outcomes
On completion of this course, the student will be able to:
A knowledge and understanding of key econometric techniques for the empirical analysis of economic phenomena, along with application of these techniques in a variety of contexts.
Research and investigative skills such as problem framing and solving and the ability to assemble and evaluate complex evidence and arguments.
Communication skills in order to critique, create and communicate understanding and to collaborate with and relate to others.
Personal effectiveness through task-management, time-management, teamwork and group interaction, dealing with uncertainty and adapting to new situations, personal and intellectual autonomy through independent learning.
Practical/technical skills such as, modelling skills (abstraction, logic, succinctness), qualitative and quantitative analysis and interpretation of data, programming of statistical packages and general IT literacy.

J. H. Stock and M. W. Watson, Introduction to Econometrics, (3rd revised edition)
Part I. Introduction and Review  
Chapter 1. Economic Questions and Data
Chapter 2. Review of Probability 
Chapter 3. Review of Statistics 
Part II. Fundamentals of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 4. Linear Regression with One Regressor
Chapter 5. Regression with a Single Regressor: Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals  
Chapter 6. Linear Regression with Multiple Regressors  
Chapter 7. Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals in Multiple Regression  
Chapter 8. Nonlinear Regression Functions  
Chapter 9. Assessing Studies Based on Multiple Regression  
Part III. Further Topics in Regression Analysis  
Chapter 10. Regression with Panel Data 
Chapter 11. Regression with a Binary Dependent Variable  
Chapter 12. Instrumental Variables Regression  
Chapter 13. Experiments and Quasi-Experiments
Part IV. Regression Analysis of Economic Time Series Data  
Chapter 14. Introduction to Time Series Regression and Forecasting 
Chapter 15. Estimation of Dynamic Causal Effects  
Chapter 16. Additional Topics in Time Series Regression 
Part V. The Econometric Theory of Regression Analysis  
Chapter 17. The Theory of Linear Regression with One Regressor 
Chapter 18. The Theory of Multiple Regression  