ECON 4010
ADVANCED TOPICS IN MICROECONOMICS
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Fall 2017

Instructor
Bo Chen
Email: bochen@smu.edu
O¢ ce: ELB 1014
Time and Location
Fridays 8:30AM - 11:15AM, YIA 402.
Course Webpage/Materials: Blackboard.
TA
Mr. Jiong Wu <j.wu@link.cuhk.edu.hk>
Tutorial and O¢ ce Hours: TBA
O¢ ce Hours
Thursday: 4:00pm-5:00pm, or by appointment.
Course Overview
This course covers several advanced topics in microeconomic theory, with a main focus on the economics
of uncertainty and information. We will begin with the theory of choice under uncertainty, so as to obtain a
solid understanding of the vNM expected utility theory and the concept of risk aversion. We will then give
a quick review of noncooperative game theory, in particular, representations of games and various solution
concepts, which will serve as the analytical tools for the rest of the course. The most important part of the
course is the study of various economics models with asymmetric information, including adverse selection,
signaling, screening, and principal-agent problems. Finally, time permitting, we will give a quick introduction
to the theory of stable matching and market design. To do well in this course, students should be familiar
with calculus, elementary optimization techniques, and basic probability theory.
Learning Outcomes
After completing the course, students are expected to
1. Acquire advanced knowledge in various important topics in microeconomics;
2. Develop useful skills in theoretical modeling and analysis in microeconomics;
3. Obtain preparations for conducting independent research in microeconomics.
Recommended Textbooks
There is no required textbook for this course. I will write my own lecture notes and my lectures will
mainly draw materials from related journal articles and the following books:
R. Gibbons, Game Theory for Applied Economists, Princeton University Press 1992.
M. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory, Oxford 2004.
M. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, The MIT Press, 1994.
R. Myerson, Game Theory: Analysis of Con‡ict, Harvard, 1991.
D. Kreps, A Course in Microeconomics, Princeton University Press, 1990.

A. Roth and M. Sotomayor, Two-Sided Matching, Cambridge, 1990.
The …rst two are excellent advanced undergraduate-level game theory books, with a lot of examples and
exercises and very intuitive exposition. Osborne and Rubinstein (1994) is an encyclopedic textbook on game
theory; Myerson (1991) is a nice textbook for those who would like to get a deeper understanding of the
materials. Kreps (1990), proceeding in a somewhat informal way, provides intuitive explanations, as well
as nice insights on many issues. Roth and Sotomayor (1990) is so far the best book on two-sided matching
problems.
Grading (Assessment Scheme)
Your course grade will be determined jointly by problem sets, an in-class midterm, and an in-class …nal
(both exams are closed-book). They will count toward the grade as follows.
Assignments 20%
Midterm
35%
Final
45%
The assignment of grades will follow the following descriptors:
Grade
A
AB+/B/BC+/C/CD+/D
F

Descriptor
Truly outstanding performance, able to apply knowledge to novel situations/problems
Thorough understanding of taught concepts, steady accumulation of knowledge and
skills throughout the course
Satisfactory grasp of key concepts, consistent involvement in learning activities
Fair understanding of key concepts
Some misunderstanding of key concepts, inconsistent e¤orts observed
Unsatisfactory performance, poor understanding of subject matter, poor e¤orts

Problem Sets:
There will be (around) 7 problem sets. These are essential adjunct to the course material. The problem
sets will be graded on the basis of whether you made an e¤ort to do the problems and not whether or
not you had the right answers. Students are expected to work on the problem sets independently and
to attend tutorial sessions, in which answers to di¢ cult problems in the problem sets will be discussed.
Each student should hand in an independent solution to each problem set. As an upper-year student,
you would play a very risky strategy if you free ride on others’ solutions without making a serious
e¤ort on the problem sets. Finally, I will NOT accept any late assignments.

Exams:
There will be two (in-class) written exams, one midterm exam and one (comprehensive) …nal exam.
The exams will only include materials that have been covered in class. The midterm exam will be
held in class on Friday, October 20th , 8:30AM – 11:15AM. There will be NO make-up exams.
For those who miss the midterm exam due to circumstances that are truly exceptional and can be
substantiated (for example, a note signed by a medical doctor indicating that the student is truly
medically incapable to take the exam at the exam time), the weight of the midterm exam of such
students will be transferred to the …nal exam. The …nal exam will be centrally scheduled and the
time and venue of the …nal will not be announced until November. Please note that we cannot arrange
a make-up exam for the …nal to accommodate your travel plans.

Lecture Notes
I will prepare a set of lecture notes, which will be posted in a timely manner on Blackboard.
2

Academic Honesty
Attention is drawn to University Policy and Regulations on honesty in academic work, and to the disciplinary guidelines and procedures applicable to breaches of such policy and regulations. Details may be
found at http://www.cuhk.edu.hk/policy/academichonesty/.
List of Topics:
The following is a tentative list of the topics that will/might be covered in the course.
1. Choice under Uncertainty
Preferences over Lotteries, Expected Utility Theory, Risk Aversion
2. Game Theory
Extensive and Normal form representations; Strategies; Mixed Strategies; Dominant and Dominated
strategies; Nash Equilibrium; Incomplete Information Games: Bayesian-Nash Equilibrium; Dynamic
Games: Sequential Rationality, Backward Induction and Subgame Perfection; Beliefs and Sequential Rationality: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium; Sequential Equilibrium; Finitely/In…nitely Repeated
Games and Folk Theorem (time permitting)
3. Information Economics
Information Asymmetry, Adverse Selection in Markets for Lemmons, Signaling, Screening
4. The Principal-Agent Problem
Moral Hazard and Risk Sharing, Hidden Information and Screening; Revelation Principle
5. Matching and Market Design
Two-Sided Matching: Marriage Market, Pairwise Stability, Deferred Acceptance Algorithm
One-Sided Matching: House Allocation, Serial Dictatorship, Housing Market, Top Trading Cycle
Important Dates
September 04, Monday: First Day of Classes.
Midterm Exam: Friday, October 20th , 8:30AM - 11:15AM (in class).
October 21, Saturday: Orientation Day for Undergraduate Admissions.
November 16, Thursday: 83rd Congregation for the Conferment of Bachelor’s Degrees and Master’s
Degrees.
Final Exam: To Be Announced.

3

