Department of Economics
Princeton University

Economics 302

Econometrics
Syllabus, Fall 2017
Lectures:

MW 1:30-2:50PM, Frist Campus Center 302

Professor:

Kirill Evdokimov, 279 JRRB
Office Hours: T 1:45-2:30PM and W 2:50-3:50PM
(please schedule the meetings via http://wass.princeton.edu)
Email: kevdokim@princeton.edu

Precepts:

M7:30PM x2, T10:00AM x2, and T11:00AM

Preceptors:

Dmitry Mukhin
Andrei Zeleneev

Web-page:

http://blackboard.princeton.edu

(mukhin@princeton.edu, office hours TBA)
(zeleneev@princeton.edu, office hours TBA)

Description/Objectives:
This course is an introduction to econometrics. Econometrics is a sub-discipline of statistics that
provides methods for inferring economic structure from data. This course has two goals. The
first goal is to give you means to evaluate an econometric analysis critically and logically.
Second, you should be able to analyze a data set methodically and comprehensively using the
tools of econometrics.

Prerequisites:



ECO 202 or ORF 245
MAT 103

Textbook:
Stock and Watson, Introduction to Econometrics, “3rd edition” or “Update (3rd edition)”.

Requirements/Grading:
Final Exam: 50%
There will be a three-hour final exam (to be scheduled by the Office of the Registrar).
Midterm: 25%
The midterm will take place in-class on Wednesday, October 25. The midterm test is required. If
a student misses the midterm test with his/her Dean’s approval the final exam will be
reweighted appropriately.
Problem Set(s): 25%
There will be a number of problem sets (approximately one per week), which will count toward
25% of your final grade. You may work with other students on the problem sets, but the
answers you submit must represent your own understanding of the solutions. Direct copying is
not permitted and will be treated as cheating. In any event, it is not in your own interest to rely
heavily on others in doing the problems. As with mathematical or analytical subjects,
econometrics can be understood only by working problems. If you do not do most of the
problems yourself, understanding of the course will suffer. We will not accept late problem sets,
but we will ignore the two lowest problem sets grades.

If circumstances arise which you feel warrant an exception to these rules, then you must either
bring a letter from McCosh, or contact first your residential college dean about the reasons you
have for requesting the exception, keeping them in the loop about your situation, and seeing if
she or he has any concerns about my granting it. The Preceptors and I will not consider any
exceptions for late homework and the like without such a written statement.

Computer Work:
Computer work is an integral part of econometrics and the problems that will be assigned
assume general computer literacy. You will be given brief introduction to STATA in one of the
first precepts.

Timing of Events:


Problem sets will be posted Wednesdays and will be due by 1:25pm the following
Wednesday in the mailbox of your Preceptor on level A of Julis Romo Rabinowitz
Building. Graded problem sets will be returned in the precept.



Precepts will start on the second week of the term.



The midterm will take place in-class on Wednesday, October 25.



The final exam will be scheduled by the Office of the Registrar.

Other information:
Email communications should be used for administrative issues. Questions of substance should
be raised in oral communications.
The questions regarding the lecture material should be addressed to the Professor. The
questions regarding the problem sets should be addressed to your Preceptor.

Course Outline:









Why should you care?
Introduction and Regression with One Regressor (Stock and Watson, Chapter 4)
The General Case (Stock and Watson, Chapters 5-9)
Panel Data (Stock and Watson, Chapter 10)
Binary Choice (Stock and Watson, Chapter 11)
Instrumental Variables (Stock and Watson, Chapter 12)
Experiments and Quasi-Experiments (Stock and Watson, Chapter 13)
Introduction to Time Series (Stock and Watson, Chapters 14, 15 and 16)

We will briefly review probability and statistics (Stock and Watson, Chapters 2 and 3). The
relevant topics include:
 Random variables, probability distributions and densities. Expectations. Multivariate
distributions, conditional distributions and independence. Special distributions:
Bernoulli, Normal, Chi-Squared, F and T.
 Large Sample Theory.
 Estimators and their properties. Confidence Intervals and Hypothesis Testing.

