Econometrics and Data Analysis I
Yale University
ECON 131a, Fall 2015
Instructor: Doug McKee (douglas.mckee@yale.edu)
Lecture: MW, 2:30pm–3:45pm, Davies Auditorium

Teaching Fellows
Michael Puempel (michael.puempel@yale.edu)
Sections: TBD
Gerardo Ruiz Sancehez (gerardo.ruizsanchez@yale.edu)
Sections: TBD
Masayuki Sawada (masayuki.sawada@yale.edu)
Sections: TBD
Jeff Weaver (jeffrey.weaver@yale.edu)
Sections: TBD

Course Description
This course will teach you how to evaluate quantitative information and how to use data to
answer quantitative questions in the social sciences. We will cover three main areas:
1. The first area, probability, provides a foundation for modeling uncertainties, such as the
uncertainties faced by financial investors, insurers, and individuals in everyday life. We
will study the mechanics of probability (manipulating some probabilities to get others)
and the use of probability to make judgments about uncertain events.
2. The second area, statistics, provides techniques for interpreting data, such as what a
marketing department might know about past consumer purchases. Statistical methods
permit us to use small amounts of information to answer larger questions.
3. The third area, linear regression, is an area of statistics dedicated to estimating the
relationships between two or more variables. For example, we might be interested in
estimating the demand for health insurance as a function of the price, insurance policy
attributes and consumer attributes.

1

The prerequisites for this course are introductory microeconomics and familiarity with single
variable calculus.
In most econometrics classes, mathematical methods are introduced and then applied to a few
examples. This class turns that around. We will focus on substantive questions first and then
introduce mathematical methods that will help us answer them. By the end of the class, you
will have acquired several concrete skills. Specifically, you will:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Understand the strengths and weaknesses of different methods.
Be able to choose appropriate methods to answer real-world questions.
Understand the math behind methods like linear regression and hypothesis testing.
Understand the intuition behind these methods.
Be able to apply these methods to analyze real data with a powerful statistical analysis
package (Stata)

Grades
Your grade will be composed of five parts:
1. Problem Sets (20%)
There will be 7 problem sets during the semester. Problem sets 1-3 and 5-7 may be passed in
through the course web site by 2:30pm or in person at the beginning of class on the due date.
You do not need to pass in Problem Set 4. The teaching assistants will grade one randomly
selected problem from each assignment (except for PS 4) and post complete solutions right
after the problem sets are due. It is your responsibility to read these solutions and make sure
you understand them. Your lowest grade on a problem set will be dropped.
2. Weekly Online Quizzes (10%)
Every Thursday, you will take an online quiz on that week’s material. The questions are mostly
easy and straight-forward and are designed to make sure you are paying attention to the lectures and reading. The quizzes are graded immediately and you will know what questions you
got wrong. You can retake the quiz one time and your highest score will count as your grade.
Annotated solutions to the quizzes will be posted every Friday morning. Your lowest quiz grade
will be dropped.
3. Empirical Project (20%)
One of the most important parts of the class is the empirical project: It is your opportunity to
use the tools you learn to answer a question you come up with and that you care about. At
the end of the second week of classes, when the roster has settled down, I will divide the class
into groups of four or five students each. Each group will identify and pass in their research
question by the end of the third week (September 18). By the end of the 8th week (October
30), each group will pass in a document that quantitatively describes their sample and the
relevant variables in it. During the last week of the classes (December 9), each group will
do a poster presentation of their results, and during reading week (by December 14), groups
will submit a written project report that includes a discussion of the empirical analysis. The
research question is worth 5% of your final grade, the data description another 5%, and the
2

final analysis (presentation and report) is worth 10%. You will get a fair bit of written and
verbal guidance throughout the process.
4. Midterm Exam (20%)
Date: October 19 (in class)
5. Final Exam (30%)
Date: TBD
Do not turn in anything late. Missed assignments or exams with no valid excuse receive
a grade of zero. If you need to miss an exam or assignment any valid reason, please obtain a
note from your residential dean and email me before the assignment is due or the exam date.
Otherwise, you will get a grade of zero.
Exams are closed book, but you may bring one double-sided page of notes. You may use nonprogrammable calculators during the exams, and if you don’t have one there will be simple
calculators you can borrow during the exams.

Lectures
Lectures will be highly interactive. I will never talk continuously for more than 10 minutes at a
time. You will be asked questions about the material and work on problems (alone and in small
groups) several times per class. You should check out a “clicker” (looks like a cheap calculator)
from the Yale Cross Campus Library before the first class. These are free, but you’ll have to
pay $40 if you lose it during the semester. Once you have your clicker you will need to register
it on the course web site.

Sections
Discussion sections in this class may be quite different from what you are used to as your
TF’s will not be summarizing the week’s lectures or going over problems in front of the class.
Instead, each week you will be using the methods you learned in lecture to analyze real data
and answer real research questions. Everyone should bring their laptop with Stata installed
and ready to go. Your entire hour will be spent interacting with your computer and each other,
with an expert (your TF) nearby to answer any questions. In this way, the experience is very
different from working on a problem set where getting stuck on something small for hours is
common. Struggling with a problem is good for learning, but banging your head against a
wall isn’t always an efficient use of time. In addition, you will work in pairs and take turns
driving—This will keep you focused and learning from each other.

3

Acceptable Use Policy
You are free to use any published materials (e.g., another textbook), in preparing Econ 131
assignments or for learning the material more generally. You are also strongly encouraged to
work with others in your class. This is particularly helpful for learning to program. Each person
must turn in their own assignment.
The use of any solution materials prepared in a previous year for Econ 131, other than materials
distributed this academic year by the course faculty, is strictly prohibited. This includes 1) any
notes, spreadsheets, or handouts distributed by me in a prior term of Econ 131; and 2) any
notes, solutions, or spreadsheets prepared by former students of Econ 131, in either written or
electronic form.
This policy means you should not solicit or use solutions to previous years’ problem sets. The
reason for this policy is that access to previous years materials can create serious inequities
between fellow students, and jeopardize the integrity of the academic environment. Academic
disciplinary actions will be taken against those who violate this policy.

Text and Readings
The required textbook for this course is Introduction to Econometrics, 2nd or 3rd edition, by
Stock and Watson (Addison-Wesley, 2010). It’s coverage of probability and statistics is somewhat rudimentary, but I will supplement this with other readings posted on the course web
site. It’s treatment of regression methods is excellent, and the book should serve you well as a
reference in the future. Purchasing this book new is expensive, but you can typically find used
copies of the textbook on the web at sites like Amazon for $25.
For students without a strong mathematical background, you may also find the following (optional) text useful: Probability and Statistical Inference, 8th or 9th ed., by Robert Hogg, Elliot
Tanis, and most recently Dale Zimmerman (Pearson, 2010 or 2013). Hogg et al provides much
deeper coverage of the concepts covered in the first half of the course than does Stock and
Watson. The most important method we will cover during the course is linear regression and
I highly recommend Paul Allison’s Multiple Regression: A Primer. The writing is extremely
clear and he covers both the intuition and mathematics behind the method.
The readings for this course are about mathematical techniques and the big picture ideas that
underly them. They are not bed-time reading. Take your time to prepare the readings for
each class, and make sure you understand what is being presented. Preparation for class means
doing some of the review exercises at the end of the assigned readings.

4

Software
Much of the course work in Econ 131, especially in the latter half of the course, will involve analysis of data using the Stata software package. Unless you already have access
to Stata software, you must purchase at least a 6 month license for Stata/IC version 13.
The student price is currently $75 and it will allow you to do all the necessary analysis
(and a whole lot more) on your own computer. To order Stata, contact Yale ITS or go to
http://www.stata.com/order/new/edu/gradplans/
I will spend some time in class teaching Stata and the program documentation is excellent.
You will get plenty of practice during your sections, and there are several terrific free online
resources for learning the software. For those students who feel more comfortable with a book
in hand, Acock’s A Gentle Introduction to Stata, Revised Third Edition is up to date and pretty
good.
You should try to attend an introduction to Stata class at the CSSSI at the beginning of the
term. I will let you know when these classes are as soon as they are scheduled.

Additional Resources
A number of additional reading materials may also be of use. These include Anderson, Sweeney,
and Williams, Statistics for Business and Economics 6th ed. (West Publishing, 1996), which
provides a more mathematical treatment of the same material in the text; Chance Encounters, by Wild and Seber; Lapin, Business Statistics (Harcourt Brace, 1984), an excellent source
of (solved) practice problems; Decision Making Under Uncertainty by Charles A. Holloway
(Prentice-Hall, 1979), which provides an extensive treatment of formal decision analysis tools
and techniques; and The Visual Display of Quantitative Information by Edward R. Tufte
(Graphics Press, 1983), a masterful reference on the use and abuse of graphics and the visual display of data.

Acknowledgements
This class is in large part derived from the econometrics class that Professor Lanier Benkard
taught at Yale in Fall 2010. I’m extremely grateful to him for sharing his syllabus, lecture slides,
assignments, handouts, exams, and advice. All of these have provided a fantastic starting point.
That said, I take full responsibility for any mistakes that I may have added to the material.
Please do not redistribute any of these materials without my and Professor Benkard’s permission.

5

Schedule
PART I: PROBABILITY
Week 1: Probabilities and Events
Lecture: September 2 and 4
Read: SW (Stock and Watson) Chapter 1
(Optional) HTZ (Hogg, Tanis, and Zimmerman) Chapter 1
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–
–

Course overview
Terminology and concepts: experiments, outcomes, and events
Probabilities and chance
Multiple events, probability rules, and Venn diagrams
Probability tables
Conditional probability: definition and intuition

Week 2: Random Variables
Lecture: September 9
Read: SW 2.1–2.3
(Optional) HTZ 2.1–2.3
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–
–

Probability trees
Independence and information sets
Terminology of random variables
Expected values
Variance and standard deviation
Covariance and independence

Week 3: Binomial and Normal Random Variables
Lecture: September 14 and 16
Read: SW 2.4
(Optional) HTZ 9th ed: 2.4, 3.1-3.3; 8th ed: 2.4, 3.1-3.4, 3.6
Due: Problem Set 1 on September 14, 2:30pm
Research Question for Empirical Project on September 18
Topics:
–
–
–
–

Calculating Binomial probabilities
Expected Value and variance of Binomial random variables
Calculating Normal probabilities
Sums of Normal random variables and standardizing

6

PART II: STATISTICS
Week 4: Sample Statistics and Estimation
Lecture: September 21 and 23
Read: SW 2.5–2.6, 3.1
(Optional) HTZ 9th ed: 6.1, 7.1-7.4; 8th ed: 6.1-6.6
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–
–

Sample and populations: Overview
Estimating a population mean and the law of averages
Estimating and using variances, covariances, and correlations
Normal approximations and the Central Limit Theorem
Distribution of sample sums and sample means
Standard errors

Week 5: Sampling and Confidence Intervals
Lecture: September 28 and 30
Read: SW 3.3
Due: Problem Set 2 on September 28
Topics:
–
–
–
–

Sampling and surveys
Accuracy of sample statistics
Confidence intervals for sample estimates
Confidence intervals for averages

Week 6: Hypothesis Testing
Lecture: October 5 and October 7
Read: SW 3.2, 3.4, 3.6
(Optional) HTZ 9th ed: Chapter 8; 8th ed: Chapter 7
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–
–

Null hypotheses and alternatives
p-value mechanics for means and proportions
Interpretation and communication of results
One-sided vs. two-sided tests
Small sample situations and t-tests
Differences in means tests

7

Week 7: Randomized Experiments
Lecture: October 12 and 14
Due: Problem Set 3 on October 12
Problem Set 4 on October 14 (ungraded practice problems for midterm)
Read: SW 3.5
Angrist and Pischke, Chapters 1–2 (online)
Topics:
– Interpreting observational and experimental data
Monday, October 19: MIDTERM EXAM

PART III: REGRESSION
Week 8: Introduction to Regression Analysis
Lecture: October 26 and online by October 28
Read: SW Chapter 4
(Optional) Allison, Chapters 1 and 5
Due: Data Description for Empirical Project on October 30
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–

Mechanics of simple regression
Correlation vs. slope
Interpreting regression estimates
Doing regression in Stata
R2 and goodness-of-fit

Week 9: Statistical Inference in Regression
Lecture: November 2 and 4
Read: SW Chapter 5
Topics:
– Hypothesis testing and statistical significance
– Confidence intervals
– Prediction

8

Week 10: Multiple Regression
Lecture: November 9 and 11
Read: SW Chapters 6-7
(Optional) Allison, Chapters 2 and 3
Due: Problem Set 5 on November 9
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Mechanics of multiple regression
Interpreting multiple regression results
Controlling for categorical variables with sets of dummy variables
Regression F-test
Joint Tests
Restricted and Unrestricted models
Tests of linear restrictions in regression models

Week 11: Model Building in Practice
Lecture: November 16 and 18
Read: SW Chapters 8–9
(Optional) Allison, Chapters 7 and 8
Topics:
–
–
–
–
–

Developing regression models
Interpreting and using results
Model building using real data
Confounding variables
Intervening variables

Week 12: Linear Probability Models and Instrumental Variables
Lecture: November 30 and December 2
Read: SW 11.1, Chapter 12
Due: Problem Set 6 on November 30
Topics:
– The linear probability model
– Estimating causal effects with instrumental variables
– Evaluating instrumental variables
Week 13: Difference-in-Differences
Lecture: December 7 and 9
Read: SW 13.1–13.4
Angrist and Pischke, Chapter 5 (online)
9

Due: Problem Set 7 on December 7
Poster Presentation for Empirical Project on December 9
Topics:
– Using diff-in-diff to estimate policy effects
– Implementing and extending diff-in-diff with regression
Reading Week
Due: Data Analysis Report for Empirical Project on December 14

10

